          ©                                                                                    Regn.No. KERBIL/2012/45073
  േകരള സർകാർ                                                                                     dated 05-09-2012 with RNI
  Government of Kerala                                                                        Reg No.KL/TV(N)/634/2021-2023
        2025




                                േകരള ഗസറ്
                                KERALA GAZETTE
                                         അസാധാരണം
                                                 EXTRAORDINARY
                                 ആധികാരികമായി ്പസിദെപടുതുനത
                                     PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
                            തിരുവനനപുരം,                                 2025 ഒകേടാബർ 29
                                                                          29th October 2025
  വാല്ം 14                          ബുധന
                                                                                                        നമർ
                                                                          1201 തുലാം 12                              3808
  Vol. XIV                                                                                               No.
                                                                          12th Thulam 1201
                              Thiruvananthapuram,
                                   Wednesday                            1947 കാർതികം 7
                                                                          7th Karthika 1947




                                                   GOVERNMENT OF KERALA

                                       Local Self Government (RD) Department

                                                           NOTIFICATION


G.O. (P) No. 53/2025/LSGD.                                        Dated, Thiruvananthapuram, 29th October, 2025

                                                                                                 12th Thulam, 1201
  S. R. O. No. 1240/2025

                                                                                                7 Karthika, 1947.
                                                                                                 TH




        In exercise of the powers conferred under sections 381, 382, 383A, 387, 398 and 406 of the
Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 (20 of 1994), read with section 565 thereof and in supersession of
the     Kerala         Municipality             Building           (Amendment)       Rules,      2025    issued      under
G.O.(P) No.16/2025/LSGD dated 19th March, 2025 and published as S.R.O. No.297/2025 in Kerala




  This is a digitally signed Gazette.
  Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                        2


Gazette Extraordinary No.1070 dated 19th March, 2025, the Government of Kerala hereby make the
following rules further to amend the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019 issued under
notification G.O. (P) No.77/2019/LSGD dated 2nd November, 2019 and published as S.R.O. No.
828/2019 in the Kerala Gazette Extraordinary No. 2691 dated 8th November, 2019 namely:—

                                                                 RULES


      1.            Short title and commencement.—(1) These Rules may be called the Kerala
Municipality Building (Amendment) Rules, 2025.


           (2) They shall come into force at once.

      2.            Amendment of the Rules.— In the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019,—
           (1)        in rule 2, in sub-rule (1),
              (a)       clause (c) shall be omittted.
              (b)        clause (i) shall be substituted by the following, namely: -
                     'approved plan' means the set of drawings and statements submitted under these
                     rules for obtaining development permit or building permit and duly approved by the
                     Secretary. It also includes self-certified building permit along with the
                     Acknowledgement Certificate of the Secretary.
             (c) for clause (l) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                     “(l) ‘Basement floor’ means any lower storey of a building partially or fully below
                     the lowest contiguous proposed ground level other than the level formed by ramps
                     on grade/ steps on grade, provided that the part of such storey above ground level
                     shall not exceed 120 centimetres from the highest proposed ground level. This word
                     is synonymous with ‘cellar’.
             (d) for clause (p), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                    "(p) Built-up area means the total area occupied by all covered space (s) at all levels
                    of the building, including mezzanine floors and penthouses at the terrace. It shall also
                    include the area occupied by all covered spaces (s) of recreational areas and vehicular
                    ramps. The overall area of the spaces covered and uncovered under the occupancy of
                    ‘Recreational Constructions’ (Occupancy Group D1) and galleries shall also be
                    included in the built-up area.




  This is a digitally signed Gazette.
  Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      3


                 The built-up area shall exclude the areas of voids and cut outs in floors, lift cut outs in
                 floors, ducts, interior open spaces, plinth offsets (if the offset does not exceed 5cm),
                 and projection of columns, vertical sun breakers or box louvers, architectural bands,
                 cornices, etc.
                 The built-up area shall also exclude the unused area at yard level that is open on at
                 least three sides and situated below any cantilevered projections of the upper
                 floor(s).”
           (e)            clause (v) shall be omitted.
         (f)       in clause (aa) item (iii) the words “cantilevered car porch” shall be omitted.
           (g)      for clause (ac), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                    “(ac)‘Cul-de-sac’ means a street with a dead end, giving access to multiple plots”.
           (h)        after clause (ap), the following shall be inserted, namely:-
                 “(apa) ‘Flatted factory’ means a multi-storeyed industrial building subdivided into
                  smaller, separately occupied units, typically used for manufacturing, assembling,
                  and storage purposes”
         (i) for clause (aqa), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
            (aqa) ‘total floor area’ means the built-up area of a building, excluding the following:

            (i) Towers, turrets, domes etc. projecting above the terrace;


            (ii) Fifty per cent of the area in the case of verandahs and balconies with at least one of
            its sides open (other than parapets) to exterior or interior open spaces;


            (iii) Open platforms and terraces at ground floor and porches;


            (iv) Area of loft, area used for parking of vehicles within a building, drive ways and
            loading cum unloading space within a building, area of electrical room, pump room, gas
            bank, battery room for solar plant, room for air-conditioning plant, generator room,
            internal sanitary shafts, air conditioning ducts;


            (v) Area used exclusively for water tanks and sewage treatment plants inside the
            buildings.".




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      4


         (j) for clause (au), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
             " ‘Front yard' means an open space extending laterally along the front side (main
             entrance side of the ground floor) of a building and forming part of the plot, between
             the farthest projection lines parallel to the direction of main entrance to the ground
             floor, drawn from the building footprint to the plot boundary.




                                                                                                ”
             Note: Where more than one entrance to a building are provided at the ground floor, the
             entrance giving access to the major portion of the ground floor shall be considered as
             the main entrance.”.
         (k) after clause (av), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
             “(ava) ‘Game court’ means a structure having a playing surface on the ground, paved or
             unpaved, with surrounding fencing designed to be used for outdoor games.
          (l) for clause (bf) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
             “height of building’ means the vertical distance measured from the average proposed
             ground level contiguous to the building;
               (i) in the case of flat roofs, to the highest point of the flat roof;
               (ii) in the case of pitched roofs and gabled roofs, to the midpoint between the eaves
               level and the ridge;
               (iii) in the case of domed roofs, to the highest point of the dome;




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      5


             provided that architectural features appurtenant roof structures like staircase tower,
             overhead tanks, air-conditioning plant rooms, lift rooms, cellular telecommunication
             equipments,            tower         structures,             cabin   for   telecommunication   towers   or
             telecommunication pole structures, chimneys, rooftop helipad, open swimming pools,
             parapet walls and similar roof structures other than pent houses shall not be included in
             the height of the building.
             Provided further that, in the case of buildings constructed on columns in sloping terrain,
             the height of the columns not exceeding 3.0 metres, functioning exclusively as a
             support structure for the lowermost floor of the building, the height of the column from
             the lowermost floor to the natural ground, need not be accounted while calculating the
             height of the building.
             Provided also that, in the case of buildings having predominantly triangular front
             elevation, with a steeply sloping roof where the eave(s) extend either to the ground or to
             a height not exceeding 2.10 metres above the average proposed ground level contiguous
             to the structure, the height of the building shall be the vertical distance measured from
             the average proposed ground level contiguous to the building to the horizontal plain
             that cuts the roof such that the distance between the sloping surfaces of the roof is 2.40
             metres.




             Note:- for arriving at the average proposed ground level, the average of the lowest
             proposed ground level and the highest proposed ground level contiguous to the building
             shall be taken.”
         (m)             after clause (bha), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
             "(bhb) ‘Incidental use’ of a building refers to a secondary or minor use of a building




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      6


             that supports or is naturally related to its primary or main use, but is not the main
             function of the space.”
         (n) after clause (bk), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
             “(bka) ‘Internal Access’ of a plot means the street, lane, road, or passage within the plot,
             providing access to different buildings in the plot.”
         (o) clause (bl) shall be omitted
         (p) after clause (bl) so omitted, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
               “(bla) ‘Lane’ means a private or a public path, having a maximum width of 1.8 metres,
               giving access to more than one plot or building.”
         (q) for clause (bna), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
             "(bna) 'low risk buildings' include, residential buildings under Group A1 occupancy
             with built up area of less than 300 square metres and limited to two storeys excluding
             basement, hostel, orphanage, dormitory, old age home, seminary all under Group A2
             occupancy having built up area less than 200 square metres, educational buildings under
             Group B occupancy having built up area less than 200 square metres, Group D
             occupancy buildings where persons congregate for religious and patriotic purposes
             having built up area less than 200 square metres, Group F occupancy buildings having
             built up area less than 250 square metres and limited to two storeys including basement,
             Group G1 occupancy buildings which are included under the white category of the
             prevailing statutes of Kerala State Pollution Control Board, without any nuisance, not
             dangerous and having built up area less than 200 square metres. Multiple occupancy
             shall not be allowed in the same building under the low-risk category.”
       (r) after the clause (bna), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
             “(bnb) Main street means a street/road, having width not less than the access width
             required for a building and plot as per these rules, through which the plot or other
             roads/streets leading to the plot can be accessed.”
       (s)      for clause (bo), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
               "Mechanised parking’ includes parking and retrieval of vehicles, facilitating
               independent ingress and egress of vehicles, by mechanical means, without requiring
               driving out the other vehicle(s) parked. However, in the case of twin car parking units
               where one car is parked above the other using mechanical means, both cars parked
               shall be considered under the mechanised parking category.”




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      7


       (t) after clause (bo), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
             “(boa) ‘medium risk industrial buildings’ include buildings in G1 category with built up
             area not more than 200 sq.m., which are included in green category of the prevailing
             statutes of the Kerala State Pollution Control Board.
       (u) after clause (bt), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
             “(bta) ‘open to sky ramps/ steps/ stairs/ bridges’ means any structure such as ramps,
             steps, stairs, bridges etc., which are not covered by a roof or overhead structure or by
             other flights of the same ramp/ staircase of any material above”
       (v) in clause (bv) after item (iv) the following shall be inserted, namely:-
               “(v) Trust represented by its managing trustee;
                (vi) LLP firm represented by its designated partner;
                (vii) Registered company represented by its managing director.”.
       (w) after clause (bv), the following clause shall be added, namely:—
             “(bva) ‘Parallel parking’ is a method of parking a vehicle parallel to the driveway
             connected, in line with other parked vehicles.




                                                                                          .”.


       (x) after clause (bx), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
               “(bxa) ‘Parking plot’ means a plot intended for parking, that is vacant or may have any
               existing authorised structure(s), under the ownership of the same owner(s) of a plot
               intended for construction.”
       (y)      for clause (by), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
               ‘‘(by) Parking space’ means an area enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to park
               vehicles, including the space for ingress and egress of the passengers to the car and
               building, connected with a driveway leading to a street, and permitting independent
               ingress and egress of vehicles”.
       (z)       for clause (cf), the following shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      8


             “(cf) ‘plot’ means a parcel or piece of land enclosed by definite boundaries as described
             in the document(s)/ digital record notified under section 13 of the Kerala Survey and
             Boundaries Act 1961, registered joint venture agreement if applicable, in support of
             ownership of the land where in the development of land or construction of building(s)
             or both is proposed and includes such pieces of land joined together for the purpose of
             development of land or construction of buildings or both”;
       (aa) for clause(cg), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
             “(cg) ‘plot area’ means the total area of the land included in the plot as per the records
             of the revenue authorities as authenticated by a possession certificate, land tax receipt
             issued by the competent authority of the revenue department or the actual area of the
             plot existing, whichever is less”
       (ab) for clause (cha), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
            “(cha) ‘Podium’ means a horizontal projection (platform) extending beyond the building
             on one or more sides up to a maximum height of 16 metres from the average proposed
             ground level contiguous to the building. The total height of the building shall not be
             less than 16 metres”
       (ac) after clause (ci), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
             “(cia) ‘Ramps on grade, Steps on grade’ means ramps, steps that are constructed
             directly on the natural ground level or on the prepared ground surface (referred to as the
             "grade"). This type of construction shall not involve elevated supports, such as piers or
             stilts.”;

     (ad) after clause (cia) so inserted, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
                 "(cib) Real Estate Project" means ‘real estate project’ as in the RERA Act modified
                 from time to time.”;


     (ae) for clause (cj) the following shall be substituted, namely:-”


        "(cj) ‘Rear yard' means an open space extending laterally along the rear side of a building
      and forming part of the plot between the farthest projection lines drawn from the building
      footprint to the plot boundary on the rear side; any side yard can be interchanged with rear
      yard”.;




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                      9




                                                                                                      ”


        (af) after clause (cj), so inserted, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—


             “(cja) ‘recreational bridges’ means bridges designed primarily for leisure and
             recreational purposes, without any vehicular movements, serving as functional and
             aesthetic elements, often used as viewing platforms.”;


      (ag) for clause (co) the following shall be substituted, namely:—


             “(co) ‘road width’ shall be the minimum width of the road at any point and includes
             carriageway, footpath, service roads, flyovers, medians, roadside drains, street furniture,
             wayside plants/trees, and the like. The minimum existing width of the road at any point,
             or the width of the road as specified in the respective asset register of the custodian of
             the road, whichever is higher, shall be considered for the purpose of this rule.”


       (ah) after clause (cp), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

               “(cpa) ‘row of parking’ is a series of parking spaces that are parallel to each other and




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  10


               provide access to a parking aisle or street. Parking rows can be single rows or can be
               back-to-back to provide access to different parking aisles.;




                                                                                              .”.




       (ai) for clause (cq), the following shall be substituted, namely:-

               “(cq) ‘secretary’ means the Secretary of a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council
               or an officer duly delegated by the Secretary under section 50 of the Kerala
               Municipality Act, 1994, to discharge such functions based on this rule as delegated by
               an order in writing”.

       (aj) in clause (csa),


              (i)     the word “empanelled” shall be omitted.
              (ii) after the words “low risk buildings”, the words “and medium risk industrial
                      buildings” shall be inserted.


       (ak) after clause (cx), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—


               “(cxa) ‘shed’ is a non-permanent structure made of materials such as metal sheets,
               fabric, wood, thatched, or plastic, designed for short-term use, typically easy to
               dismantle and relocate.”;




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  11


       (al) for clause (cy), the following shall be substituted, namely:-


               “(cy) ‘side yard’ means an open space extending laterally along the sides other than
               front and rear, of a building and forming part of the plot between the farthest
               projection lines drawn from the building footprint to the plot boundary on the sides;
               any side yard can be interchanged with rear yard.”;




                                                                                                  ”


       (am) after clause (dk), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—


               “(dka) ‘Turf’ means a plain surface on ground, with grass/ artificial grass, with
               surrounding fencing designed to be used for outdoor games.”


       (an) for clause (ds), the following shall be substituted, namely:—


               “(ds) ‘width of street’ means the right of way of the street and includes carriageway,
               footpath, service roads, flyovers, medians, roadside drains, street furniture, wayside
               plants/trees, and the like. The minimum existing width of the street at any point of the
               street or the width of the street as specified in the respective asset register of the




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  12


                custodian of the street, whichever is higher, shall be considered for the purpose of this
                rule.”;


       (ao) for clause (dt), the following shall be substituted, namely:—


                “(dt) 'yard' means an open space at ground level between a building and the adjoining
                boundary lines of the plot, unoccupied and unobstructed except by structures such as
                compound walls, retaining walls and other structures specially permitted by these rules
                on the same plot with a building. All yard measurements shall be the minimum
                distance between the front, rear and side yard plot boundaries, as the case may be, and
                the nearest point of the building including enclosed porches.”;
         (2)       in rule 3, in sub rule (1),—
               (a) for clause (d) the following shall be substituted, namely:—
                “(d) where addition or extension is made to a building, these rules shall apply to the
                addition or extension only:
                Provided that, for calculation of Floor Space Index, coverage, required offstreet
                parking area to be provided, width of access to the plot as well as minimum width of
                the street giving access to the plot from the main street, lift(s) and facilities for
                differently abled persons, the whole building existing to be retained and proposed shall
                be taken into account.”

               (b) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted namely:-


                “(e) Where a group of buildings is to be put up within any plot belonging to the same
                owner or by different owners of adjoining lands jointly; for calculation of Floor Space
                Index, coverage, required off-street parking area to be provided, width of access to the
                plot as well as minimum width of the street giving access to the plot from the main
                street, all the buildings existing to be retained in the plot and proposed in the plot shall
                be taken into account.”.
         (3) in rule 4, for sub rule (2) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “No person shall construct or reconstruct or make addition or extension or alteration to
                any building or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a building permit
                from the Secretary, and in the case of low-risk building and medium risk industrial




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  13


               building without obtaining an Acknowledgement Certificate from the secretary which
               shall be deemed to be a permit.”.
         (4)       in rule 5,—
             (a)      in sub-rule (1), in clause (c),
                   (i) after the words “title deed” the words “or the registered lease agreement with
                   validity of minimum 10 years or until the operation of the building ceases,
                   whichever is higher” shall be inserted.
                   (ii) after clause (c), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
                   “Provided that, application for permit may be submitted by an authorised signatory
                   of a registered company.”.
             (b)       for sub-rule (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   “Applications shall be submitted through the online application processing e-filing
                   system, if such system is in force in the Local Self Government Institution, in the
                   manner prescribed therein by such system. The Secretary shall receive, process, and
                   issue necessary orders on the application in the manner prescribed therein by such e-
                   filing system.”.
             (c) for sub rule (3), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   “In the case of any development or redevelopment of land and/or construction or
                   reconstruction of a building or alteration or addition or extension or change in
                   occupancy to a building, in plots owned by Central or State Government Department
                   or by any Local Self Government Institution, the officer authorized shall, before
                   commencement of the work, submit to the Secretary, through the online permit
                   approval system applicable, a set of layout plan or plans of the proposed plot
                   subdivisions and/or, a set of plans and other details as described in rule 6 of these
                   rules,     of the building(s) where construction or reconstruction or alteration or
                   addition or extension or change in occupancy is proposed, as the case may be. The
                   application shall be submitted in Appendix A6 along with ‘Self-certified building
                   permit for Government Buildings’ in Appendix O1, and with the necessary required
                   NOCs, together with all other details duly verified and signed by the officer
                   authorised and the Chief Architect/the Engineer-in-charge of the works. It shall be
                   the responsibility of the officer authorised and the Chief Architect/ the Engineer-in-
                   charge to ensure that the application is in conformity with the provisions of these




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  14


                  rules in all respects including conformity to any Master Plan / Detailed Town
                  Planning Scheme / Interim Development Order in force under the Kerala Town and
                  Country Planning Act, 2016 (9 of 2016) prepared for the area. An
                  ‘Acknowledgement certificate for Government Buildings’ in Appendix A1C shall
                  be issued, which, along with the self-certified permit for Government Buildings’ in
                  Appendix O1, shall act as the permit for carrying out the works. In such cases, the
                  application fee and permit fee, approvals from the Chief Town Planner or District
                  Town Planner, as the case may be, as per these rules are not required. The officer
                  authorised and the Chief Architect or the Engineer-in-charge for the works as per
                  this clause shall ensure that no works are commenced or carried out or completed
                  without obtaining the ‘Self-certified building permit for Government Buildings’ in
                  Appendix O1 along with ‘Acknowledgement certificate for Government Buildings’
                  in Appendix A1C.
               (d) in sub rule (4), —
                   (i) after the words “submit along with the application for permit”, the words “as
                          stipulated in TABLE A” shall be inserted.
                   (ii) for the existing table the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                                                                      TABLE A
                                            NOC/PERMISSION TO BE OBTAINED
       Sl.no.          Location/ Use of the site and or building                    Officer/ authority
          (1)                                       (2)                                     (3)
           1        As per prevailing notifications of Defence Officer in charge of the
                    establishments from time to time                            Defence establishment
           2        Proposed buildings within 30 m from Railway Railway                              Authority
                    track boundary or Telecommunication towers concerned
                    within 100 m from the Railway track
                    boundary
           3        Proposed site/buildings in areas declared, The                    Art   and       Heritage
                    identified or advised by the Art and Heritage Commission
                    Commission as possessing heritage value.

           4        Proposed buildings within any Security Zone                 District Collector




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  15


           5        Proposed           buildings/places               for   religious Municipality
                    purpose or worship
           6        Proposed fuel filling stations                                      District Collector
           7        Proposed crematoria or burning and burial District Collector
                    grounds including cemetery and vaults
           8        Proposed site/buildings in any area notified Kerala                            Coastal       Zone
                    by the Government of India as a coastal Management                                       Authority
                    regulation zone under the Environment (KCZMA)
                    Protection Act, 1986 (Central Act 29 of 1986)
                    and rules and notifications made thereunder.
           9        Any activity as specified in the schedule to State Level Environment
                    the Notification No. S.O. 1533(E) dated the Impact                                    Assessment
                    14th September, 2006 and as amended from Authority                                (SEIAA)        /
                    time to time, issued by the Ministry of Ministry of Environment
                    Environment and Forests, Government of and Forests
                    India
          10        As per prevailing statutes of the Kerala State Kerala                         State      Pollution
                    Pollution Control Board.                                            Control Board
          11        Proposed          traffic      terminal           stations    like Chief Town Planner
                    mobility hubs, bus stands or inter-state bus
                    terminals
          12              i.         Any       proposed         building         under Director of Department of
                                     Group A1,A2,B,C,E,F,G1, G2 and Fire and Rescue Services
                                     H     occupancy           exceeding         1000 or an officer authorized by
                                     square metres of built-up area or him in this regard to the
                                     exceeding 15 m of height                           effect that the construction
                                                                                        of the building conforms
                                                                                        to the fire and safety
                          ii.        Any       proposed         building
                                                          under norms specified in part 4
                                     Group D, I and J occupancy Fire and Life Safety of
                                     irrespective of the number of National Building Code of
                                     storeys.                      India,     2016      and




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  16


                                                                       subsequent amendments.”
                                                                       [Provisions regarding the
                                                                       height of the building as
                                                                       specified in the National
                                                                       Building code of India
                                                                       2016 shall not apply to
                                                                       multiplex complexes]
          13        Any proposed building under Group A1, A2, A self-declaration in the
                    B, C, E, F, G1, G2 and H occupancy form in Appendix- L from
                    exceeding 300 sqm and below 1000 sqm of the applicant along with a
                    built-up area, as also in the case of buildings certificate             from       the
                    not exceeding 15 m height.                         architect/engineer,            who
                                                                       had prepared the plan, to
                                                                       the     effect         that     the
                                                                       construction           of       the
                                                                       building conforms to the
                                                                       fire   and         safety     norms
                                                                       specified in part 4 Fire and
                                                                       Life Safety of National
                                                                       Building Code of India,
                                                                       2016         and      subsequent
                                                                       amendments. Also, a copy
                                                                       of     the     self-declaration
                                                                       form and certificate of the
                                                                       architect/ engineer shall be
                                                                       submitted to the nearest
                                                                       Fire          Station           for
                                                                       information].
          14        Proposed buildings within 20km vicinity from Airport Authority of India
                    Airport Reference Point (ARP) and/or as per (AAI)
                    the colour coded zoning map approved for
                    each airport and/or all buildings having




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  17


                    elevation more than 150m from ground level
                    Proposed single storeyed buildings below the Chief Electrical Inspector/
                    Electrical line and if clearance not available an Officer authorized by
          15
                    as per rule 22 (5) Table 2 and for installation him in this regard.
                    of transformers
                    Any activity within 300 metre distance from Archaeological Survey of
                    any protected monument/area notified by the India
          16
                    Archaeological Survey of India
          17        As per prevailing statutes of Kerala State Kerala State Archaeology
                    Archaeology Department                                         Department
          18        Buildings          of      various         occupancies     as District     Town     Planner/
                    mentioned in Table 11 of these rules, Chief                                Town      Planner
                    excluding buildings in plots owned by Central concerned, if required
                    or State Government Department or by any
                    Local Self Government Institution
          19        Proposed site/ building forms part of any District                         Town     Planner/
                    Town         Planning         Scheme         for   the   area, Chief       Town      Planner
                    excluding buildings in plots owned by Central concerned, if required
                    or State Government Department or by any
                    Local Self Government Institution
          20        As per prevailing statutes of National National                                    Highway
                    Highway Authority                                              Authority
          21        As per prevailing statutes of the Kerala Building     Energy
                    Energy Conservation and Sustainable Efficiency Experts firms/
                    Building Code Rules (KECSBCR)
                                                             Building     Energy
                                                                                   Efficiency           Experts/
                                                                                   Empanelled            Energy
                                                                                   Auditors           (Building)/
                                                                                   Certified Energy Auditor
                                                                                   (Building)
          22        Required permission/No Objection Certificate Department/agency




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  18


                     of any other departments/agencies                  concerned

                 (iii) First proviso shall be omitted,
                 (iv) Second proviso shall be omitted,
                 (v)      In Note (i), the words “all livestock and poultry farms under Group G1 or G2
                          occupancies, and” shall be omitted,
                 (vi) Note (ii) shall be omitted.
             (e) sub-rule (5) shall be omitted.

             (f) in sub-rule (6),

                 (i)      in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), in item (v), for, the word “FAR”, with the word
                          “FSI” shall be substituted;
                 (ii)     for clause (4) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                          "In case of the layout of building(s) and usage of plot approved by the District
                          Town Planner or Chief Town Planner, a revised layout approval is not
                          necessary for deviations having no change in occupancy of the building(s) and
                          for an increase in occupancy-wise built-up area not exceeding 10% of the
                          occupancy-wise built-up area as per the approved layout.”.
         (5)      in rule 6,-
               (a) in clause (a) of sub-rule (4), for item (i) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                  “(i) boundaries of the plot intended for the proposed construction, and any
                  contiguous plot belonging to the same owner and boundaries of the parking plot (if
                  any), including the revenue details like survey/ Re Survey number with subdivision,
                  block, village, taluk, extent, dimensions etc.
               (b) in sub rule (7), after item (xi), the following shall be inserted, namely:-
                  “(xii) include floor plans of all floors, elevations and sections together with a
                  statement on the area and floor-wise and use-wise built-up area, of all buildings
                  existing in the plot and parking plot if any, including that of accessory buildings, if
                  any.”.
         (6)      in rule 8,
               (a)      for item (x) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                  “(x) Changing the location of the proposed construction(s) or building(s) within the
                  plot.”




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  19


               (b)      for item (xii), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                  "(xii) Livestock buildings/ farms having a total built-up area not more than 250
                  square metres for raising domesticated animals and not more than 100 square meters
                  for raising domesticated birds. For these constructions, a 1.5metre clear open space
                  shall be provided all around the building/structure. Waste management system in
                  accordance with the method specified in the Livestock License Rules shall be
                  provided for these constructions."
               (c)       for item (xiii), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                         “ Mechanical Parking Structures.”
               (d) after item (xv) the following item shall be inserted, namely:-
                     “(xvi) Pump houses, not more than 10 square metres of built-up area exclusively
                     meant for agricultural activities.”.
         (7)         in rule 9 in sub-rule (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-

             “Provided that for a permit application, if the bonafides of the ownership of the site, the
             site plan, drawings and specifications are electronically verified and accepted for
             compliance with these rules or bylaws made under the Act or any other law/
             notifications applicable, physical site verification by the Secretary or the officer duly
             authorised by the Secretary is not mandatory before issuing the permit and shall be
             conducted during the plinth level inspection. The licensee and the owner(s) shall ensure
             and be responsible for the correctness of the details and compliance of the site with
             these rules or bylaws made under the Act or any other law/ notifications applicable.”.


         (8)         for rule 15 the following shall be substituted, namely:-
             “15. Extension and renewal of periods of permits.-(1) A development permit or a
             building permit or an acknowledgement certificate/Acknowledgement certificate for
             Government Buildings, which shall be deemed to be a permit, issued under these rules,
             shall be valid for five years from the date of issue.
             (2) The Secretary shall, on application submitted within the valid period of the permit,
             grant an extension once, for a further period of five years. In the case of an
             acknowledgement certificate, which shall be deemed to be permit the intention to
             extend the permit for another five years is to be intimated to the Secretary by a letter




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  20


             signed by the owner and the licensee or through the online application processing e-
             filing system, if such system is in force:

             Provided that, in case the permit/ acknowledgement certificate/ acknowledgement
             certificate for Government buildings needs to be extended beyond the period of ten
             years, the applicant shall submit an application in writing to the District Level
             Committee and the committee may, after having satisfied with the genuineness of the
             application, recommend for extension of period of the permit once, with or without
             condition(s) as it deems fit for further period of five years. However, the total period of
             validity of the permit shall not exceed 15 years from the date of issue of the original
             permit.

             (3) The fee for extension of the period of permits shall be 10% of the permit fee in force
             at the time of granting extension, excluding the fee for additional Floor Space Index:
             Provided that, in case the period of permit is extended beyond a period of ten years from
             the date of issue of the original permit, the fee for extension of period of permit shall be
             the permit fee in force at the time of granting extension, excluding the fee for additional
             Floor Space Index.
            (4)The Secretary shall grant renewal for a period of five years on application submitted
            after the expiry of the permit, subject to the condition that the total period of validity of
            the permit from the date of issue of the original permit shall not exceed ten years. In the
            case of acknowledgement certificate/acknowledgement certificate for Government
            buildings, which shall be deemed to be a permit the intention to renew the same for
            another five years is to be intimated to the Secretary by a letter signed by the owner and
            the licensee or through the online application processing e-filing system, if such system
            is in force.
            Provided that, in case the permit needs to be renewed beyond the period of ten years, the
            applicant shall submit an application in writing to the District Level Committee as
            specified in sub-rule (12) of rule 15 of these rules, within three years from the date of
            expiry of the permit, and the Committee may, after having satisfied with the genuineness
            of the application, recommend for renewal of the permit once, with or without
            condition(s) as it deems fit, for further period of five years. However, the total period of
            validity of the permit shall not exceed 15 years from the date of issue of the original
            permit.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  21


           (5) The fee for renewal of period of permit shall be 50% of the permit fee in force at the
           time of granting renewal, excluding the fee for additional Floor Space Index:
           Provided that, in case the period of permit is renewed beyond a period of ten years from
           the date of issue of original permit, the fee for renewal shall be twice the permit fee in
           force at the time of granting renewal, excluding the fee for additional Floor Space Index.
           (6) The application for extension or renewal of a permit shall be submitted in white
           paper, either typed or written in ink, or through the online application processing e-filing
           system if such system is in force specifying the name and address of the applicant, the
           number and date of issue of the permit, the stage of development or construction, if
           already commenced, together with application fee as provided in Schedule I or through
           the online application processing e-filing system, if such system is in force.
           (7) The applications submitted in white paper, either typed or written in ink, shall be
           affixed with necessary court fee stamp and shall contain the original of the permit and
           approved plan sought to be extended or renewed.
           (8) The development work or construction work shall be commenced and completed
           within the valid period of the permit.
           Note: - Non-commencement of any work within the period specified, if any, in a permit
           issued before the commencement of these rules shall not be considered as a ban for
           extension or renewal of permit.
            (9) A development permit or a building permit issued under the Kerala Municipality
            Building Rules, 1999 including that under the orders of Government granting exemption
            from rule provisions, shall be extended or renewed, on proper application, on like terms
            and for like periods as a permit issued under these rules.
           (10) In case the period of validity stipulated in the permit issued before the
           commencement of these rules is different from that stipulated in subrule (1), then the
           extension or renewal of the permit shall be granted in such a way that the total valid
           period of the permit shall not exceed ten years.
           (11) The application for extension or renewal of a development permit or a building
           permit shall be signed and submitted by the owner of the permit or his legal heir to whom
           the site devolves or a legally authorized representative or submitted through the online
           application processing e-filing system, if such system is in force:




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  22


           Provided that if the plot or a part of the plot concerned has been transferred, the
           application for extension or renewal of permit shall not be accepted and acted upon until
           the provisions of rule 19 has been fully complied with.”
           (12) The Government shall by notification, constitute the District Level Committee,
           consisting of the following members, namely:-
                 (i) The District Town Planner - Convenor
                 (ii) The Executive Engineer, Jilla Panchayat - Member
                 (iii) The Secretary of the Local Self Government Institution concerned – Member
                 (iv) Municipality/Municipal Corportion Engineer of the Local Self Government
                 Institution concerned – Member.
         (9)      for rule 16, the following shall be substituted, namely:-,
             “Suspension and Revocation of permit.-(1) The Secretary shall suspend or revoke any
             permit issued under these rules if it is satisfied that the applicant has violated any
             provisions of the Act or rules or any conditions stipulated in the permit or that the
             construction is carried out in deviation of the approved plan or Town Planning scheme
             or that the permit was happened to be issued on misrepresentation of fact or law or that
             the construction, if carried on, will be a threat to life or property:
             Provided that before revoking permit, the owner of the permit shall be given an
             opportunity to be heard and the same shall be duly considered by the Secretary:
             Provided further that if the permit issued under these rules is revoked before the
             commencement of the building construction, then the additional fee for FSI remitted by
             the applicant, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant on request and the permit issued
             shall be cancelled henceforth.
             (2) If the applicant is not availing additional FSI and on submission of a valid
             declaration in writing that, additional FSI will not be further availed, the additional fee
             for FSI remitted by the applicant, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant after the
             expiry of the building permit/on issuance of Occupancy Certificate, and shall be
             recorded accordingly in the building permit and building permit register”.
         (10) in rule 17, sub-rule (19) shall be omitted.
         (11) for rule 19, the following shall be substituted , namely:-
               “19. Transfer of plots to be intimated.-(1) Whenever a person holding development
               permit or building permit transfers the ownership of the property involved in the




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  23


               permit either fully or partly, such person or the transferee shall, give notice of such
               transfer to the Secretary within 60 days of the date of such transfer. In the case where
               the application for transfer of permit is submitted after 60 days of the date of transfer
               of ownership, a fine of Rs. 250/- shall be paid along with the application.
                Note: In case of death of any person holding development permit or building permit,
                or in the case of transfer of ownership of a property involved in a permit by authority
                of a competent court order, the person who receives the ownership right over the
                property involved in the permit shall also be considered as transferee of the property.
                (2) The transferee or the person who acquires ownership by inheritance or otherwise,
                as the case may be, shall be bound to produce documents proving the transfer of
                ownership before the Secretary.
                (3) Every person who remains or becomes the owner of the property involved in the
                permit shall obtain permission from the Secretary in writing before commencing or
                continuing the work. The request for permission to commence or continue work shall
                be submitted in a white paper or through the online application processing e-filing
                system if such system is in force, along with documents regarding the ownership and
                possession certificate, and a fee of Rs 100/-.
                (4) In case where the plot is transferred as a whole and there is no change in the area
                of the plot involved in the approved permit, the Secretary shall, after verification of
                the ownership documents, issue permission in writing transferring the permit and
                allowing the commencement or continuation of work, within 15 days from the date of
                receipt of the request.
                (5) In case where the transfer of a plot leads to a change in area of the plot based on
                the approved permit, where the transferred portion of the plot does not contain any
                proposed construction, a revised site plan, service plan, and parking plan
                incorporating the changes in the plot shall be submitted by the original owner along
                with the application. The Secretary shall approve the revised site plan, service plan
                and parking plan after ensuring that such change in plot area does not result in
                violation of any of the regulatory provisions of the rules or the Act or Master Plan, or
                Town Planning Scheme, or any applicable statute based on which the permit was
                originally issued.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  24


                (6) The permit is liable to be revoked as per the provisions of the rule 16, if the
                transferred portion of the plot contains any proposed constructions or if such transfer
                of plot violates any of the regulatory provisions of these rules or the Act or Master
                Plan or Town Planning Scheme or any applicable statute.
         (12) in rule 19A,
               (a) in sub-rule (1), after the words “low risk buildings”, the words “and medium risk
                     industrial buildings” shall be inserted;
               (b) in sub-rule (2) for the word “Acknowledgment” the word “Acknowledgement”
                     shall be substituted;
               (c) in sub-rule (3), the word “empanelled” shall be omitted;
               (d) in sub-rule (5), for the word “receipt” the word “certificate” shall be substituted.
         (13) in rule 19B,
               (a) the word “empanelled” wherever they occur shall be omitted;
               (b) in sub-rule (1), after the words “low risk buildings”, the words “and medium risk
                     industrial buildings” shall be inserted.
         (14) in rule 19D, the word “empanelled” whereever they occur shall be omitted.
         (15) in rule 19F, the word “empanelled” shall be omitted.
         (16) in rule 20,-
               (a)        in sub-rule (1)after the proviso the following Note shall be added, namely:-
                  “Note: In the case of Single/ Dual unit residential occupancy buildings under group
                  A1 with built up area not exceeding 500 square metre, the occupancy certificate may
                  be granted upon completion of the structural works of the building, external doors,
                  minimum sanitation facilities and handrails for stairs if any.”
               (b)        in sub-rule (3), for the first proviso the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                  “Provided that, in case there is deficiency as per provisions of these Rules, in
                  minimum width of mandatory open space/yard stipulated as per rule 26 of these
                  rules, after completion of the construction, other than the distance stipulated as per
                  rule 23 (section 383A of the Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 (20 of 1994)) and sub-
                  rule (6) of rule 81 of these rules, the Secretary may allow a tolerance up to 5% of the
                  minimum mandatory open space/yard to be provided as per rule 26 of these rules or
                  twenty five centimetres, whichever is less, for the building constructed:”
               (c) after as sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  25


                   “20(6) After the completion of any construction or reconstruction or alteration or
                   addition or extension or change in occupancy to a building in plots owned by the
                   Central or State Government Department or by any Local Self Government
                   Institutions occupancy certificate shall be issued by the Secretary in Form F2B.”
         (17) for rule 21, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
               “21. Post Occupancy Audit.- (1) The Secretary or an officer authorised by the
               Secretary may carry out Post Occupancy Audit except for residential buildings up to
               two storey, commercial buildings up to 100 square metres, religious buildings and
               buildings under group G1, G2 and I occupancies, within two years after the issue of
               Occupancy Certificate and shall submit the report to the Government on violations
               observed if any.
               (2) Post-Occupancy Audit may be conducted at any time after two years from the
               issuance of the Occupancy Certificate, and may be carried out multiple times if
               required by the authority.”
         (18) in rule 22,-
               (a) for sub-rule (3), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   “No land development or redevelopment shall be made or no building shall be
                   constructed on a plot which is liable to be flooded or on a slope forming an angle of
                   more than 45 degrees with horizontal or on soil unsuitable for percolation or on area
                   shown as floodable area in any Master Plan/Detailed Town Planning
                   Scheme/Interim Development Order in force under the Kerala Town and Country
                   Planning Act, 2016 (9 of 2016) and on any plot declared unsuitable for
                   constructions, by any regulations specified by the concerned Disaster Management
                   Authority.”.
               (b) for sub-rule (5), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   “(5) No building or part of a building shall be constructed or reconstructed or no
                   addition or alteration shall be made to any existing building in the intervening
                   spaces between the building and any overhead electric supply line as described in
                   the Table 2 below and as specified in the Indian Electricity Rules as amended from
                   time to time.
                   Provided that single-storied buildings shall be allowed even if the above-mentioned
                   clearance is not available, if the applicant produces a no-objection certificate from




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  26


                   the Chief Electrical Inspector or an officer authorized by him, before the issue of the
                   permit.
                                                                       TABLE 2
                                   CLEARANCE FROM OVERHEAD ELECTRIC LINES
          Sl No               Type of Electric Supply Line                   Minimum Horizontal Clearance in
                                                                                       meters
            (1)                                  (2)                                       (3)
              1        Low and medium voltage lines up to                                 1.20
                       and including 11,000 volts
              2        High voltage lines exceeding 11,000                                2.00
                       volts up to and including 33,000 volts
              3        Extra high voltage lines above 33,000 2.00 plus 0.30 meter per very
                       volts                                 additional 33,000 volts or part
                                                             thereof


         (19) in rule 23,
               (a) for sub-rule (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   “(1) No person shall construct any building other than compound wall or fence or
                   outdoor display structure or ramps on grade without roof or steps on grade without
                   roof, within 3 metres from the boundaries of national highways, state highways,
                   district roads, other roads notified by Municipality, other un-notified roads with
                   width 6 m and above:
                   Provided that ramps or bridges or steps or similar structures, all open to sky, with or
                   without parapets or railings, having a maximum width of 5.0 meters or the required
                   access width to the building, whichever is higher shall be permitted as access from
                   the street to the building only in such cases where the level difference between the
                   street and the plot does not permit natural access to the building. Cornice roof or
                   weather shade, not exceeding 75 cms, and steps/ ramps all open to sky and having a
                   maximum projection of 1.20 metres, also shall be permitted to project from the
                   building into such 3 metres. In no case, access to more than one floor other than
                   through a ramp on grade/ step on grade can be provided within this 3 metres:
                   Provided further that the underneath of such flight of steps or ramp shall not be
                   enclosed or made usable; however, pillars may be permitted for its support.”.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  27


               (b)        in sub-rule (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                     “(2) The minimum distance between the boundaries of the street and building other
                     than ramps on grade, steps on grade- both without roof, or a compound wall or
                     fence or outdoor display structure shall be provided as in Table 3.


                                                                       TABLE 3
                 DISTANCE BETWEEN PLOT BOUNDARY ABUTTING THE STREET AND
                                                                       BUILDING
           National Highway, State Highway, District                       Other un-notified roads with width less
            Roads, other roads notified under section                                     than 6m
           383A of the Kerala Municipality Act 1994,
           other un- notified roads with width 6m and
                                      above
                                        3m                                                  2m
                     Provided that in the case of Cul –de –sac of whatever width but not exceeding 250
                     m total length or pedestrian lanes and streets up to average 3 m width or internal
                     roads with streets of whatever width within or leading to any residential colony it
                     shall be sufficient if the distance between the plot boundary abutting the street and
                     building is 2 m for buildings up to 8 m height:
                     Provided also that in the case of lanes or streets not exceeding 75 m total length,
                     leading to more than five individual plots after the applicant's plot, it shall be
                     sufficient if the distance between the plot boundary abutting the lane and the
                     building is 1.5 m for buildings up to 8 m height.
                     Provided also that in the case of lanes or streets not exceeding 75 m total length
                     leading to not more than five individual plots after the applicant’s plot, it shall be
                     sufficient if the distance between the plot boundary abutting the lane and the
                     building is 1.0 m, with the written consent of the land owners of the plots after the
                     applicant’s plot on either side of the lane, for buildings up to 8 m height.
                     Provided also that for residential buildings up to 8 m height and upto a total built
                     up area of 100 sq.m. in plot having an area not more than 81 sq meter abutting an
                     unnotified road of width up to 3m, the distance between the plot boundary abutting




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  28


                    the road and the building shall not be less than 1.0 m, provided that the land owner
                    has no other land under his ownership.
                    Provided also that, in plots having an area of less than 5 cents, the construction of
                    septic tank, leach pit, well, sump, and rainwater harvesting structures—entirely
                    located below ground level—as part of any single/dual unit residential building
                    may be permitted, subject to a minimum setback of 1.2 meter from any of the road
                    boundary, and upon ensuring adequate protective measures.
                    Provided also that, in the case of addition/extension/alteration to any authorized
                    building for which the occupancy certificate was granted before 8th November
                    2019, it shall be sufficient that, the minimum distances between the plot boundary
                    abutting the street and the building stipulated as per this rule, be made available
                    from the plot boundary abutting the road to the portion of the building proposed to
                    be added/ extended/ altered.
         (20) in rule 24,
               (a) for the marginal heading the following shall be substituted namely:-
                    “24.Maximum height of buildings”
                (b) (i) for sub-rule (1), the following shall be substituted namely:-

                         “(1) The maximum height of any building or part there of the building other
                         than for single/dual unit residential buildings having a height not more than 8.0
                         metres, shall be limited according to the width of the street as follows.”

                      (ii) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:-

                           “(a) The maximum height of the building or part thereof shall not exceed twice
                           the width of the street abutting the plot plus twice the width of the yard from
                           the building to the abutting street.
                           Provided that, in the case of building(s) with a podium, the            yard value
                           corresponding to the top level of the podium needs to be considered for the
                           purpose of this rule.”
                      (iii)     in clause (b), for the proviso the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                           “Provided that the height restriction as per this rule shall be compulsory only
                           for buildings or part of building coming within 9 metres of the building line:”
         (21) in rule 25,




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  29


                   (a) in sub rule (1),
                           (i) for Note (ii), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                              “(ii) Any building other than Multiplex Complex (group J occupancy)
                              building which accommodates more than one use under sub-rule (1) shall
                              satisfy the most restrictive rule(s) applicable on a rule-to-rule basis,
                              wherever not specifically mentioned otherwise.”
                               (ii) for Note (v), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                              “Notwithstanding anything contained in Note (ii), use(s) incidental to
                              operations in another type of occupancy in a building shall be considered as
                              part of the main occupancy and shall be classified under the main
                              occupancy. The total floor area of such incidental occupancy(ies) shall not
                              be more than 20% of the total floor area of the building.”
                       (b) in sub-rule (2),
                            (i) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                              “(a) Group A1 – Residential Building shall include any building in which
                              sleeping accommodation is provided for normal residential purposes, with
                              or without cooking and/or dining facilities. They shall include one or
                              multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings, or residential flats.
                              Small professional offices, spaces for advocates, doctors, engineers,
                              architects, chartered accountants, beauticians, tailors, photographers,
                              videographers, telephone booth operators, computer professionals, typists,
                              electrical or electronic equipment service professionals – all not exceeding
                              50 sq. metres built-up area and used as part of principal residential
                              occupancy are also included in this group. Creches, daycare centres,
                              children’s nurseries, reading rooms, and educational buildings not exceeding
                              200 sq. metres are also included in this group.
                              Small household businesses such as flour mill, food processing unit, and
                              bakery units- having built-up area not exceeding 100 sq. meters or 50% of
                              the total built-up area of the building, whichever is less, used as part of
                              principal residential occupancy are also included under this group.
                              Note: Buildings for pain and palliative activities, excluding clinical facilities
                              and not exceeding 300 sq. meters of built-up area, but having special




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  30


                              provisions for the differently abled, elderly, and children as stipulated in rule
                              42, and stand-alone water tank structures without any habitable area may
                              also be included under this group.
                           (ii) in clause (b), after the words “old age homes”, the words “retirement
                                homes, community living for senior citizens,” shall be inserted.
                           (iii) clause (e), shall be substituted, namely:-
                                “Group D - Assembly building shall include any building or part of a
                                building exceeding 200 sq. metres of built-up area where people
                                congregate or gather for amusement, recreation, social, religious, patriotic,
                                political, civil, travel and similar purposes such as theatres, motion picture
                                houses or cinemas, assembly halls for educational, dramatic or theatrical
                                presentations, auditoriums, convention centres, wedding halls, community
                                halls, exhibition halls, art galleries, museums, skating rings, gymnasiums,
                                congregation, dance halls, club rooms, passenger stations or transport
                                terminals, recreation piers, amusement park structures, stadia and circus
                                tents. Recreational facilities with or without covered roofs having galleries
                                to accommodate spectators also shall be included under this occupancy”.
                         (iv) after clause (e), the following item shall be added, namely:-
                                “(ea) Occupancy D1 – ‘Recreational Constructions’, shall include space(s),
                                with or without roofs, which are used for recreational activities and similar
                                purposes on a commercial basis, having no gallery facilities and do not
                                accommodate spectators- such as turfs, game courts, swimming pools etc.
                                that are not incidental to any buildings under other occupancy group,
                                recreational bridges, viewing platforms, platforms for adventure sports
                                activities/ rides such as zip lines, giant swings, rope walk and the like.”
                         (v) clause (f), shall be substituted with the following, namely:-
                                “(f) Group E - Office building shall include any building or part of a
                                building having a total built up area of more than 200 sq. metres which is
                                used for accommodating libraries, offices of public or private agencies, or
                                for keeping of records, accounts and similar purposes. Local, State and
                                Central Government offices, buildings for office purposes constructed by
                                private sector and quasi-government agencies and buildings for the use of




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  31


                                purposes, court houses, public utility buildings, jails and prisons are
                                included in this group. All Information Technology Buildings are also
                                included in this group. Further, in the case of Government Owned
                                Information Technology Parks, Government Approved Private Information
                                Technology Parks and Government Approved Private Information
                                Technology Buildings, all buildings or part of buildings intended for
                                providing ancillary or support services, amenities and utilities such as
                                offices, residences, social amenities, recreational facilities, commercial
                                establishments etc. shall also fall under this occupancy group.”
                         (vi) in clause (g), (i) for the words “Further, buildings or part of building used
                                exclusively for parking of vehicles (parking buildings, parking plazas etc.)
                                are also included in this group.”, the words “Further, buildings or part of
                                building used exclusively for parking of vehicles (parking buildings,
                                parking plazas etc.), stand-alone toilet blocks and kitchen units are also
                                included in this group.” shall be substituted.
                               (ii) in the Note, the words, figures and letter “and with not more than 300
                               sq. meters built up area accommodating the uses under Group H” shall be
                               omitted
                         (vii) in clause (h), for the note the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                                  “Note:- Building under Group G1 – Industrial – I occupancy, shall
                                  generally, include Engineering work shops, Automobile service stations,
                                  Automobile wash stalls, Electroplating works, Service garages with
                                  repairing facilities, furniture making units, Cashew factories, oil mills,
                                  Fish processing units, Coir factories, Water treatment/Filtration plants and
                                  Water pump houses, Clock and Watch manufacturing units, Bakeries and
                                  biscuit factories, confectionaries, Food processing units, food catering
                                  unit, Electric lamps (incandescent and fluorescent) and T.V. tube
                                  manufacturing units, Dry cleaning, dyeing and laundry units, Flour mills,
                                  Manure and fertilizer works (blending, mixing and granulating only)
                                  units, Oxygen plants, Plastic goods manufacturing and PVC pipe
                                  manufacturing units through injection/extrusion moulding, printing press,
                                  rubber goods manufacturing units, manufacture of synthetic leather, spray




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  32


                                  painting units, textile mills and buildings exclusively for transformer/
                                  electric rooms/ power generator installations; all up to 1000 square metres
                                  total built up area.”
                         (viii) for clause (i), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                                  Group G2– Industrial– II building shall include any building or part of a
                                  building or structure in which products or materials of all kinds and
                                  properties are fabricated, assembled, manufactured or processed in which
                                  the contents or industrial processes or operations conducted therein are
                                  liable to give rise to a fire which will burn with extreme rapidity or result
                                  in other hazardous situation or from which poisonous fumes or explosions
                                  are to be anticipated in the event of a fire.
                                  Note (1): - Building under Group G2 - Industrial – II occupancy, shall
                                  generally,        include           Bituminized   paper/   hessian   cloth/   tar   felt
                                  manufacturing, cotton waste factories, modern meat processing
                                  unit/slaughter houses wherein facilities mentioned in the Kerala
                                  Panchayat Raj (slaughter house and meat stalls) Rules, 1996 are provided,
                                  Electric and gas crematoria, distilleries, tyre retreading and resolving
                                  factories and petroleum refineries, LPG bottling plants and Chicken
                                  rendering plants.
                                  Note (2):- For the purpose of these rules, all buildings with total built up
                                  area exceeding 1000 square metres, under uses mentioned in item (h)
                                  above shall be included in Group G2 - Industrial – II occupancy
                         (ix) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
                              “(ia) Buildings under Group G3- Livestock buildings/ farms having a total
                              built-up area exceeding 250 square metres, for raising domesticated animals
                              and exceeding 100 square meters for raising domesticated birds, shall be
                              included in this group."
                         (x) in clause (j),- (i) the words and figures “exceeding 300 square meters of
                              built up area” shall be omitted.
                              (ii) after the last sentence, the following shall be added, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  33


                                    “Resource Recovery Facilities, Material Recovery Facilities, Material
                                    Collection facilities all proposed as stand-alone facilities in a plot shall
                                    also be included in this group.”.
                         (xi) in clause (k)
                              (i)      the words, figures and letters “sewage treatment plants of capacity
                                       more than 100 KLD” shall be omitted
                              (ii) for the words, figures and letters “Sewage treatment plant of capacity
                                      less than 100 KLD and constructed as part of the main building shall be
                                      treated as an ancillary building of the main use” the following shall be
                                      substituted, namely:-
                                    “Sewage Treatment Plant, Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant, Sanitary
                                    incinerator - all proposed as stand-alone facilities in a plot, not incidental
                                    to any other main occupancy, shall also be included in this group.
                                    Sewage Treatment Plant, Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant, Sanitary
                                    incinerator - all proposed as incidental to any other main occupancy, shall
                                    be treated as an ancillary building of the main use.
                                    In the case of crematoria, burial grounds, vaults, and garbage dumping
                                    yards, the area occupied by these respective uses, irrespective of whether
                                    covered on top or not, shall be considered to be as built spaces under
                                    these occupancies.”
                         (xii) for clause (l), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                               “ Group J: - Multiplex complex shall mean an interconnected and integrated
                               building complex comprising of shopping centres/ shopping malls, having
                               more than one cinema hall(s)/ screens. The multiplex complex building also
                               may comprise of entertainment area having restaurants, cafeteria, fast food
                               outlets, video games parlours, pubs, bowling alleys, health spas/centres,
                               convention centres, other recreational activities and all other permissible
                               uses under occupancy Groups A1, A2, F and E. The total built-up area of
                               the multiplex complex shall not be less than 12,000 sq. metres and the
                               height of the building shall not exceed 50 metres. The height restriction of
                               30 meters for buildings for the same purpose under “Assembly Category”
                               as specified in National Building Code of India, 2016 and subsequent




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  34


                               amendments shall not be applicable for buildings under this occupancy
                               group. The fire and Rescue norms/standards as decided by Fire and Rescue
                               Department shall be applicable for the height beyond 30 meters.
                               Note: The different rules stipulated for each occupancy category of spaces
                               within a multiplex complex building shall apply as the case may be unless
                               specifically mentioned for multiplex complex (J) occupancy.”
         (22) for rule 26, the following shall be substituted, namely:-

               “26. Exterior and Interior open air spaces.- (1) Every room intended for human
               habitation shall abut on an exterior or interior open space or verandah open to such
               exterior or interior open space and such open space shall be maintained for the benefit
               of the building exclusively and shall be entirely within the owner's own premises and
               shall be open to the sky and is barred from being subdivided, partitioned or legally
               bifurcated or transacted, in any manner whatsoever, till such date when the structure
               itself is demolished and shall be kept free from any erection thereon other than those
               specially allowed in these rules.

                   (2) In the case of buildings with multiple occupancy other than multiplex complex,
                   yards for the most restrictive occupancy shall be provided.

                   (3) The required minimum and average yards shall be provided at the ground level
                   itself for the whole building.

                   (4) The minimum and average yard values for every building up to 10 metres in
                   height shall not be less than the values as per TABLE 4.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                   35


                                                                           TABLE 4

                               MINIMUM AND AVERAGE YARDS FOR BUILDINGS UNDER
                                                          DIFFERENT OCCUPANCIES

                                                                                     Value of Yards
                                                                Front       Front    Rear     Rear     Side     Side
Sl.
                   Occupancy/Category                           Avera       Minim    Avera Minim      Avera    Minim
No.
                                                                ge (in      um (in   ge (in um (in    ge (in   um (in
                                                                metre)      metre)   metre) metre)    metre)   metre)
(1)                      (2)                                     (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
        Buildings in Group A1 & A2 of any
        built up area, buildings in Group F
        with built up area not exceeding
        200 sq. Metres, buildings in Group
        G1 occupancy which are included
        under the white category of the
1                                                                      3     1.8      1.5      1        1        1
        prevailing statutes of the Kerala
        State Pollution Control Board,
        having built up area less than 200
        sq.m. and buildings in Group H
        with built up area not exceeding
        300 sq. metres
        Building in small plots under
        Group A1 and F (built up area not
2                                                                 1.8        1.2       1      0.5      0.6      0.6
        exceeding 200 sq. metres and plot
        area not exceeding 125 sq. metres)
                                     above
                                    200- up
3                                    to 500                            5      3        2      1.5       2       1.5
         Buildings in Group B,
                                       sq.
         C & E of built up area
                                     meters
           exceeding 200 sq.
                                     Above
                 metres
                                      500
4                                                                      6     4.5       3      1.5       2       1.5
                                    sq.metre
                                        s
5       Buildings in Group D of  above                                 6     4.5       2      1.5       2       1.5
        built up area exceeding  200 –
             200 sq. metres     upto 500
                                sq.metre
                                    s




 This is a digitally signed Gazette.
 Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  36


                                               above
                                               500 –
6                                             upto 800           7.5       5     3     1.5   4     1.5
                                              sq.metre
                                                  s

                                                Above
                                                 800
7                                                                10.5      6     3     1.5   5     1.5
                                               sq.metre
                                                  s
       Buildings/ Constructions in Group
8                                                                     3    3     1.5   1.5   1.5   1.5
       D1
       Buildings in Group F of built-up
9                                                                     3    3     1.5   1.5   1     1
       area exceeding 200 sq. metres
                                  Built up
                                    area
10                                upto 200                            3    3     2     2     2     2
                                     sq.
                                   metres
        Buildings in Group G1
                                  Built up
                                    area
11                                exceedin                            3    3     3     3     3     3
                                 g 200 sq.
                                   metres
12            Buildings in Group G2                                   5    5     5     5     3     3
                                   above
                                  100 – up
13                                 to 750                             3    3     2     2     2     2
        Buildings in Group G3
                                  sq.metre
            of built-up area
                                      s
        exceeding 100 m2 for
                                   Above
                 birds
                                    750
14                                                                    5    5     5     5     3     3
                                  sq.metre
                                      s
                                   above
                                  250 – up
15                                 to 750                             3    3     2     2     2     2
        Buildings in Group G3
                                  sq.metre
            of built-up area
                                      s
        exceeding 250 m2 for
                                   Above
                animals.
                                    750
16                                                                    5    5     5     5     3     3
                                  sq.metre
                                      s
        Buildings in Group H of built-up
17                                                                    6   4.5    3     1.5   2     1.5
          area exceeding 300 sq. metres
18                    Group I                                     7.5      7.5   7.5   7.5   7.5   7.5
19                    Group J                                    10.5     10.5    5     5     5     5




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  37




     Note - Average yard shall be calculated based on the area of the yard between the building
     and plot boundary.
     Provided that for buildings up to 10 meter in height and referred to in rows (1) and (2) in
     Table 4, the minimum and average values of any one side yard and/or rear yard of a building
     can be reduced up to 50 centimetres if there is no opening on that portion of the sides:
     Provided further, for buildings under Group A1, A2 and F occupancies, having built up area
     not more than 200 m2 and height of building up to 8 metres, any one side yard and/or rear
     yard can be reduced below 50 cm, and also can abut the boundary other than that of a street,
     with the written consent of the adjoining land owner, if there is no opening on such portion of
     those sides. If one land owner voluntarily agrees to abut the building in the neighbouring plot
     to his plot boundary, then the land owner may, also have the right to abut his building to the
     same plot boundary without a written consent:
     Provided also that, for the portion of the plot not forming part of any of the yards, the
     minimum distance between the building and the plot boundary shall not be less than the
     smallest of the minimum yard values of all yards applicable to the building as per these rules:
     Provided further that for buildings on podium, having height of the podium not exceeding
     16.0 metres and total height of the building more than 16.0 metres, the minimum and average
     values of the yards as per these rules, may be provided in two levels. The minimum and
     average values of the yards required by these rules for a height equal to the height of the
     podium shall be given at the ground level, subject to a minimum of 3.0 metres, and the yard
     values considering the total height of the building shall be provided on the topmost level of
     the podium.
     Note: The maximum built-up area of any particular floor above podium level shall not exceed
     75% of the covered area of the podium.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  38




     In case where multiple buildings are provided on a single podium, both the podium and each
     individual building shall independently comply with the provisions applicable to mandatory
     open yards, and parts of buildings as specified in Chapter V of these rules.
     Provided also that in the case of appurtenant buildings used exclusively for the parking
     purpose of the main building and constructed in the same plot, the open yard abutting the
     street shall have minimum 3 metres and other sides shall have minimum 1 metre for
     buildings up to 10 metres in height and additional open space corresponding to height of the
     building shall be provided at the rate of 50 centimetres for 3 metres height or part thereof at
     the ground level itself. Such appurtenant building may abut the main building but the light
     and ventilation of the main building shall not be reduced below the required minimum by
     such abutting:
     Provided also that unless otherwise specified in a Master Plan / Detailed Town Planning
     Scheme/ Interim Development order in force under the Kerala Town and Country Planning
     Act, 2016 (9 of 2016), side yards may not be provided for buildings under group F mercantile
     or commercial occupancy, other than high rise buildings, in an area exclusively zoned for




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  39


     commercial use in such plan/scheme/order, if the owner of the plot abutting the property
     under construction voluntarily agrees for the same in writing.
     (5) In case a group of buildings are to be put up within any plot belonging to the same owner
     or by different owners of adjoining lands jointly, the minimum and average values of the
     yards as stipulated in table 4 shall be provided between the building(s) and the plot
     boundary(ies), and the distance between any two buildings up to 10 metres height shall be 2
     metres and for building(s) above 10 metres in height, this shall be 3 metres.
     Provided that, in the case of a group of single/dual unit residential building(s) the minimum
     distance between any two buildings up to 8 metres in height shall be 1.50 metres:
     Provided further that, in the case of multiple buildings on a single podium, the minimum
     distance criteria between buildings shall not be applicable among the podium and the
     buildings above it.
     (6) For buildings above 10 metres in height, in addition to minimum and average values of
     the front, rear, and side yards as stipulated in Table 4, and the minimum width of interior
     open space required for height up to 10 metres, there shall be provided an increase in such
     minimum and average values of the yards, and the minimum width of interior open spaces, at
     the rate of 0.5 metre per every 3 metres height or fraction thereof exceeding 10 metres, to be
     provided at the ground level itself, until the minimum values of each yard reaches 16 metres,
     and no further additional setback is required for additional height above this.
     Provided that, in the case of addition/extension/alteration to any authorised building for
     which the occupancy certificate was granted before 8th November 2019 it shall be sufficient
     that the minimum and average distances stipulated as per this rule be made available from the
     plot boundary to the portion(s) of the building which are proposed to be added/ extended/
     altered.
     (7) In buildings up to 10.0 metres height, any room intended for human habitation and not
     abutting open air spaces on the front, rear, or side shall abut on an interior open space whose
     width shall not be less than 2.4 metres.
     (8) At least 50% of the total open space in the plot shall be left unpaved or, paved with
     suitable materials enabling percolation of rainwater.
     (9) No construction or hanging of any sort shall be permitted to project outside the
     boundaries of the site.
     (10) Every mandatory open space/yard provided as per these rules, either interior or exterior,




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  40


     shall be kept free from any erection thereon such as Generators, AC plant room, recreational
     space, and the like, and shall be open to the sky, and only cornice, roof or weather shade not
     more than the width specified in TABLE 5 below, shall overhang or project over the said
     mandatory open-space/yard. However, ramps on grade, steps on grade- both without roof
     may be permitted on these mandatory open yards.
                                                                      TABLE 5
                                                PROJECTIONS PERMISSIBLE
                                                                                    Width of
  Sl No                    Mandatory open space/yard as per these rules.           projection
                                                                                  permissible
    (1)                                                    (2)                         (3)
     1         Below 0.60 metres                                                 No projection
     2         0.60 metres or more but below 1.0 metre                            0.30 metres
     3         1.0 metres or more but below 1.50 metres                           0.60 metres
     4         1.50 metres and above                                              0.75 metres

     Provided that when the open space /yard actually provided is more than the minimum
     prescribed as per these rules, the width of cornice, roof or weather shade shall be permitted
     corresponding to the increase in the open space/yard provided, subject to a maximum of 1.20
     metres:
     Provided further that in the case of construction of buildings in small plots and building
     construction as per approved schemes of these rules, windows shall be permitted if the open
     space on that portion of the sides is at least 0.60 metres:
     Provided also that flight of step or ramp, all open to sky, with or without parapets or railings
     having a maximum width of 5.0 meters or the required access width to the building
     whichever is higher, meant as access to floors immediately above and/or below the level of
     the street connecting to the building shall be permitted in the open space if such stair, step or
     ramp has minimum 0.50 metres distance from the boundaries:
     Provided also that the underneath of such flight of steps or ramp, shall not be enclosed
     however pillars may be permitted for its support.
     (11) The minimum and average yard values for the front, rear, and side yards for
     constructions below the lowest proposed ground level shall be the same as that required for a
     10-metre-high building of the same occupancy group as stipulated in TABLE 4.
     (12) Rain Water Harvesting Tanks, and other water tanks for domestic uses -all situated fully




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  41


      below the lowest proposed ground level shall have a minimum distance 0.50 metres from the
      plot boundaries other than that abutting the road.

 (23) in rule 27,-
          (a)       in sub-rule (1), in the Note, “(1)” the brackets and figures shall be omitted;
         (b)        in sub-rule (2),-
                      (i) for TABLE 6 the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                                                              TABLE 6
                                   COVERAGE AND FLOOR SPACE INDEX (F.S.I)
                                                                                 Maximum permissible
                                                                                           F.S.I.
                                                                                      With
                                                                                  additional fee With additional
                                             Maximum
Sl.                                                                                      of             fee of
                 Occupancy                   permissible               Without
No.                                                                                Rs 5000 per    Rs. 7500 per sq.
                                              Coverage                additional
                                                                                    sq. metre           metre
                                                                         fee
                                                                                     for the           for the
                                                                                   additional     additional area
                                                                                      area
(1)                (2)                              (3)                  (4)            (5)               (6)
 1        Residential A1                            65                    3              4                 6
          Lodging Houses &
 2        Special                                   65                   2.5            4
          Residential A2
          Educational
          B - Upto Higher                           40                   2.5            3
 3        Secondary
          Educational
                                                    50                   2.5            3
          B - Others
 4        Medical/Hospital C                        50                   2.5           3.5
 5        Assembly D                                40                   1.5           2.5
 6        Assembly D 1                              70                   1.5           1.5
 7        Office E                                  60                    3             4
          Mercantile/
 8                                                  65                    3             4                6
          Commercial F
  9       Industrial-I G1                           65                   3.5           4.5               5
 10       Industrial-II G2                          65                   2.5            4                5
 11       Industrial-III G3                         75                   2.5            -
 12       Storage H                                 70                    3             4
 13       Hazardous I                               45                   1.2            -
 14       Multiplex complex J                       65                    3             4




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  42


                     (ii)     for clause (iv) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                        “In the case of Government owned Information Technology Parks, Government
                        approved private Information Technology parks, private Information Technology
                        parks under E occupancy, the maximum permissible F.S.I. shall be 7 and the
                        maximum permissible coverage shall be 70%. The additional fee prescribed in
                        TABLE 6 shall not be applicable in the case of Government owned and
                        Government approved Information Technology parks.”
                     (iii) after clause (vii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
                        (viii) “The maximum coverage of 70% and FSI of 7 shall be permissible for
                        commercial buildings in the areas declared as commercial zones, TOD zones and
                        CBD zones in the various Town Planning schemes / plans where the Town
                        Planning schemes / plans do not stipulate any FSI/coverage regulations in such
                        zones. Fee for additional FSI over and above FSI specified in TABLE 6 shall be
                        chargeable as specified in such schemes / plans or as decided by the Government
                        from time to time.”.
     (24) in rule 28,-
                (a)         in sub-rule (1),
               (i)             for TABLE 7, the following TABLE shall be substituted, namely:-

                                                                TABLE 7
                                      ACCESS FOR GROUP A1 OCCUPANCY

                                                                                              Minimum
                                                        Total Floor Area of Building(s) in width of access
       Sl No                  Occupancy
                                                                    Sq. metres               required in
                                                                                               metres
         (1)                       (2)                                  (3)                     (4)
                                                        Single unit up to 300               No minimum
                                                        Multiple Units up to 300               1.20
                                                        Above 300 up to 600                    2.00
                                                        Above 600 up to 1000                   3.00
           1                       A1                   Above 1000 up to 4000                  3.60
                                                        Above 4000 up to 8000                  5.00
                                                        Above 8000 up to 18000                 6.00
                                                        Above 18000 up to 24000                7.00
                                                        Above 24000                            8.00

               (ii)          For TABLE 8, the following TABLE shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                   43


                                                                      TABLE 8
                           ACCESS FOR OCCUPANCY GROUPS A2, B, C, D, D1, E, F


                                        Total Floor Area of the building          Minimum width of access
Sl No            Occupancy
                                                 in Sq metres                        required in metres

   (1)                 (2)                                   (3)                             (4)
                                       Up to 300                                             2.4
                                       Above 300 upto 1000                                  3.00
    1                  A2              Above 1000 up to 4000                                3.60
                                       Above 4000 up to 8000                                5.00
                                       Above 8000 up to 18000                               6.00
                                       Above 18000                                          8.00
                                       Up to 300                                            1.20
                                       Above 300 up to 1000                                 3.00
                                       Above 1000 up to 1500                                3.60
    2           B, C, D, E, F          Above 1500 up to 6000                                5.00
                                       Above 6000 up to 12000                               6.00
                                       Above 12000 up to 18000                              7.00
                                       Above 18000                                          8.00
                                       Up to 3000                                           3.00
    3                  D1
                                       Above 3000                                           5.00

                (iii) for TABLE 8A, the following TABLE shall be substituted, namely:-

                                                                      TABLE 8A
                             ACCESS FOR OCCUPANCY GROUPS G1, G2, G3, H, I, J

                                                                                           Minimum
                                                     Total Floor Area of the building   width of access
              Sl No           Occupancy
                                                              in Sq metres                required in
                                                                                            metres

                (1)                 (2)                                  (3)                  (4)
                                                    Up to 300                                3.00
                                                    Above 300 up to 1500                     3.60
                 1               G1, G2
                                                    Above 1500 up to 6000                    5.00
                                                    Above 6000                               6.00
                                                    Upto 250                                 1.20
                                                    Above 250 up to 750                      3.00
                 2                  G3
                                                    Above 750                                5.00
                 3                   H              Up to 500                                3.60
                                                    Above 500 up to 1500                     5.00




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  44


                                                    Above 1500                           7.00
                   4                  I                                                  7.00
                   5                  J                                                 12.00


                (iv) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
                        “Provided also that the clear width of bridges/ culverts or similar structures, if
                        any, on the existing public street giving access to the plot shall not be less than
                        the minimum access width required or 3.6 metres, whichever is lower.”
                (v) the fourth proviso shall be omitted.
                (vi) after the sixth proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:-
                        “Provided also that in the case of Sewage Treatment Plant, Faecal Sludge
                        Treatment Plant, Sanitary incinerator- all proposed as stand-alone facilities in a
                        plot, the access width shall not be less than 4 metres.
                        Provided also that in the case of Small household businesses such as flour mill,
                        food processing units, and bakery units up to 100sqm. built up area or 50% the
                        total built-up area of the building, whichever is less used as part of principal
                        residential occupancy, the access width shall not be less than 1.2 metres.
                        Provided also that in the case of Group G1 occupancy buildings which are
                        included under the white category of the prevailing statutes of the Kerala State
                        Pollution Control Board, having floor area less than 200 sq.m. the minimum
                        width of access shall not be less than 1.2 metres.”
                (vii) after the fifteenth proviso, the following shall be inserted, namely:-
                        “Provided further that, in the case of those commercial buildings availing FSI
                        more than 4, referred under clause (viii) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 27, the minimum
                        width of access shall not be less than 8 metres, irrespective of the floor area”;
             (b)       for sub-rule (8), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                        “The clear headroom for motorable access through a building, to the plot and to
                        the building, other than for single/dual unit residential under Group A1, shall not
                        be less than 5.50 metres. Also, the enclosed space shall have a clear minimum
                        width equal to the required access width plus two metres.”
           (25) for rule 29, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                        “29. Parking, loading cum unloading spaces.- (1) Dimension of each off-street
                        parking space provided for parking motor cars shall not be less than 5.5 metres x




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  45


                       2.7 metres. In the case of parallel parking, the minimum dimension for parking
                       motor cars shall not be less than 6.0 m x 2.7 m. The area requirements for each
                       off-street parking space for parking two-wheelers shall be 3 square metres, with
                       a minimum dimension of 1.5 m.
                          (2) For any building(s), off-street parking spaces for motor cars shall be
                          provided within the plot as specified in TABLE 9, and 10 as the case may be.
                          (3) Parking requirement shall be calculated based on total floor area.


                                                                      TABLE 9
        OFF STREET PARKING SPACE FOR GROUP A1 OCCUPANCY - RESIDENTIAL
                                                       APARTMENTS/ FLATS
            Total Floor Area of dwelling units                              Off-street parking spaces at the rate of

                                   (1)                                                        (2)

                       Up to 75 sq. metres                                 1 for every 2 dwelling units
       Above 75 Sq. metre up to 185 Sq. metre                              1 for every dwelling unit
       Above 185 Sq. metre up to 300 Sq. metre                             1.5 for every dwelling unit
                      Above 300 Sq. metre                                  2 for every dwelling unit



       Note: For calculation of floor area of dwelling units, the area covered by each dwelling unit
       measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the dwelling unit and from the
       center line of common walls separating two dwelling units as the case may be shall be
       considered.
                                                             TABLE 10
 OFF STREET PARKING SPACE - FOR OCCUPANCIES OTHER THAN GROUP-A1
                                                                       One Parking space for every
  Sl No.            Occupancy
                                                                           or fraction thereof
    (1)                   (2)                                                       (3)




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  46


      1        Group A2-           90 sq. metres of floor area for total floor area up to1170 sq.
               Lodging houses & metres and at the rate of 60 sq. metres for the additional floor
               special residential area in excess of 1170 sq. metres.

                                              Note: 1) In the case of hostel building(s), it is sufficient that a
                                              minimum 50% of the parking required for Group A2 as above
                                              shall be provided.

                                              2) In case of hostel buildings proposed along with educational
                                              building in the same plot, old age homes, retirement homes,
                                              community living for senior citizens, seminaries/convents and
                                              orphanages, it is sufficient that a minimum of 25% of the
                                              parking required for Group A2 as above shall be provided.
      2        Group B-
               Educational
               (i) High Schools,              (i) 300 sq. metres of total floor area
               Higher Secondary
               Schools, Junior
               Technical
               Schools,
               Industrial
               Training Institute
               etc.
               (ii) Higher                    (ii) 120 sq. metres of total floor area
               educational
               institutions
               Group C-
      3
               Medical/ Hospital              90 sq. metres of total floor area
      4        Group D-                       15 sq. metres of total floor area
               Assembly-
               Wedding Halls,                 Note:—(i) In the case of Wedding Halls, Community Halls,
               Community Halls,               Exhibition Halls, Convention Centres, Auditoriums, where
               Exhibition Halls,              there are separate spaces provided for dining, for calculating
               Convention                     the floor area for the purpose of parking, the floor area of
               Centres,                       either the main hall (s), where people congregate for the
               Auditoriums.                   activities (excluding the areas of common lobby, passages) or
                                              the dining hall, whichever is higher, alone need be taken.
               Group D-                       20 sq. metres of total floor area
      5
               Assembly- Other
      6        Group D1-                      250 sq. metres of total floor area.
               Recreational
               Constructions




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  47


               Group E - Office               90 sq. metres of floor area for total floor area up to 1170 sq.
               Building                       metres and at the rate of 60 sq. metres for the additional floor
                                              area in excess of 1170 sq. metres.
      7
                                              Note (ii) In the case of library, for calculating the floor area
                                              for the purpose of parking, the area of the stacking space for
                                              books shall be excluded.
      8        Group F-                       90 sq. metres of floor area for total floor area up to 1170 sq.
               Mercantile/                    metres and at the rate of 60 sq. metres for the additional floor
               Commercial                     area in excess of 1170 sq. metres.
               building
               exceeding 90 sq.
               metres floor area.
               Group G1-
      9        Industrial-I
               Building                       240 sq. metres of total floor area
     10        Group G2-
               Industrial– II
               Building                       240 sq. metres of total floor area
     11        Group H-Storage                240 sq. metres of total floor area
     12                                       60 sq. metres of total floor area
               Group J Multiplex
               complex

          Provided that in the case of a building/building complex accommodating more than one
          occupancy, parking as above shall be made available in the same plot itself, earmarking the
          occupancy wise parking areas as detailed in TABLE 9 and 10 for the respective
          occupancies:
          Provided further that, in the case of occupancies other than group A1(Residential), not
          more than 75% of the required off-street parking, excluding parking for differently abled,
          may be provided in another individual parking plot having the same ownership as that of
          the plot proposed for construction, situated at a maximum motorable distance of not more
          than 200 meters from the plot proposed for construction. The provisions stipulated in rule
          29 (4) shall also be applicable to the parking plots:
          Provided also that, a registered agreement between the secretary and the owner(s) to the
          effect that, the parking plot will not be transferred nor be used for, other than the intended
          purpose as stipulated in the permit, shall be enclosed along with the permit application:
          Provided also that, if there are existing building(s) in the parking plot, the mandatory off-
          street parking and facilities stipulated as per these rules required for the existing building
          shall also be made available in the parking plot and the mandatory open space of the




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  48


         existing building(s), as per the prevailing rules, shall not be used for such parking. Also, no
         constructions shall be proposed in the parking plot and the parking plots shall not have any
         unauthorized structures, nor any valid building permit issued for which the parking plot
         forms a part fully or partially:
         Provided also that a maximum of 70% of the required off-street parking provided in the
         parking plot may be given as mechanical parking:
         Provided also that, the type of land used for parking plot shall be suitable for land
         development or redevelopment or building construction purposes as per the prevailing Acts
         and rules:
         Provided also that, at the time of renewal of the operational license of the building, the
         Secretary shall ensure that the parking plot is retained as declared at the time of permit.
         Note: Fractions if any in the total number of parking worked out for separate occupancies
         shall be added and then be rounded off to the next whole number. In addition to the above,
         additional car parking space has to be provided inside the plot if required and on-street
         parking will not be permitted.
         Provided that, in the case of Government Owned Information Technology Parks, Bio
         Technology buildings/Parks, Government Approved Private Information Technology Parks
         and Government Approved Private Information Technology Buildings under Group E
         occupancy, the off street car parking requirement shall be at the rate of one parking space
         for every 100 square metres of total floor area or fraction thereof.
         (4) Every off-street parking space shall be provided with adequate vehicular access to a
         street, area of drives, aisles and such other provisions required and adequate area for
         maneuvering of vehicles in addition. Such drives, ramps, aisles intended for vehicular
         movements shall satisfy the following:
         (i) Drive way leading to off-street parking space shall have width not less than 3 metres
         and shall be motorable. But in the case of Group – A1 Residential occupancy, if the
         number of units is not more than 8, the width of such motorable access to off-street car
         parking shall not be less than 2.4 metres.
         (ii) Width of ramp for driveway for one-way direction shall not be less than 3.5 metres, 5.5
         metres for two-way direction and at curves it shall not be less than 4 metres and 6 metres
         respectively, and slope of such ramps shall not be steeper than 1:7. But if the number of
         parking spaces to which the ramp leads to is not more than 75 cars in case of Group A1




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  49


         Residential occupancy, and not more than 25 cars in case of other occupancies, the width
         of ramp for driveway for two-way direction may not be provided.
         (iii)     The width of vehicular passage for rows of parking for motor cars shall not be less
         than 4.0 meters.
         (iv)The headroom for the driveway, ramps, passage etc. for motor car movement shall not
         be less than 2.2 meters at any point.
         (v)       The headroom of floors exclusively used for parking of cars and two wheelers shall
         not be less than 2.2 metres.
         (5) Wherever any off-street parking space is required under these rules, there shall be
         parking spaces provided for two-wheelers, having an area equivalent to 25% of the area for
         mandatory car parking required, provided as parking units for two wheelers, rounded off to
         next whole number, having dimensions as stipulated in 29(1) of this rule. The minimum
         width of the driveway to two-wheeler parking spaces shall be 1.20 meters.
         (6) In the case of apartments/flats, 15% of the number of mandatory off-street parking as in
         TABLE 9 shall be provided additionally, earmarked and maintained exclusively to
         accommodate visitors’ parking.
         (7) In addition to the parking space as specified in TABLE 10, loading cum unloading
         space shall be provided within the plot, as specified in TABLE 10A.


                                                                 TABLE 10A
                    Occupancy                               Loading cum unloading area required in sq. metres
                          (1)                                                      (2)
            Group F- Commercial                       30 square metres per every 1000 square metres of the floor
                                                      area or fraction thereof, excluding the first 700 square
                                                      metres of the floor area.
         Group G1- Industrial-I and                   30 square metres per every 800 square metres of the floor
           Group G2- Industrial-II                    area, or fraction thereof, excluding the first 500 square
                                                      metres of the floor area.
                    H – storage                       30 square metres per every 700 square metres of the floor
                                                      area or fraction there of excluding the first 300 square
                                                      metres of the floor area.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  50


        Provided that, within the loading cum unloading space specified as per TABLE 10A, a
        minimum of one space having dimensions not less than 3.0 m x 6.0 m, having adequate
        vehicular access to a street, area of drives, aisles and such other provisions required and
        space adequate for manoeuvring of vehicles shall be provided within the plot. This space
        shall be provided on the same level as that of the remaining loading cum unloading spaces,
        and shall be connected to the remaining loading cum unloading spaces if any, through a
        clear way having a width not less than 1.50 meters.”
        (8) At least fifty percent area of each mandatory open yard shall be kept vacant on each
        yard, and the remaining yard may be used for providing parking if such yard has adequate
        vehicular access and area for manoeuvring.
        (9) The minimum mandatory open spaces around any building(s) as well as mandatory
        parking spaces as per these rules shall not be sold or let out for parking of vehicles other
        than that for the building(s).
        (10) Of the mandatory off-street car parking requirement as per these Rules, fifty per cent
        at the maximum may be provided for by mechanised parking, on condition that the
        owner/occupant shall ensure proper safety, structural stability and functioning of such
        mechanized parking system at all times.
        (11) In the case of structures used exclusively for mechanized parking a minimum distance
        of not less than 1.0 meters and 1.5 meters from the plot boundary to the structure shall be
        provided respectively, for structures having heights less than or equal to 10. Meter and
        more than 10 meters. However, such a structure may abut a building in the plot irrespective
        of the height of the facility.
        Also, in addition to the mandatory car parking spaces required as per this rule, there shall
        be a minimum of one car parking space provided adjacent to the mechanical parking
        facility if any, functioning as a queuing space facilitating hindrance-free ingress and egress
        of the car to the mechanical parking facility.


        (12) All buildings requiring parking shall have a facility for charging electrical vehicles.
        The government shall notify the number of charging points to be provided in accordance
        with the size and occupancy of the building as required from time to time.


  (26) for rule 30, the following shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                    51


                          “30. Approval for layout of buildings and usage of plot- Approval of the District
                          Town Planner, shall be obtained for the usage of plots and lay out of buildings
                          with area/dwelling units as stipulated in TABLE 11.
                                                                    TABLE 11
                                                                   Buildings requiring approval of District Town
                        Occupancy
                                                                                      Planner
                               (1)                                                      (2)
                                                              Building(s) with number of dwelling units exceeding
(a) Apartments (Group A1)
                                                              100
    Lodging houses & Special
                                                              Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 8,000 Sq.
(b) Residential (Group A2) &
                                                              metres
    Educational (Group B)
      Medical/Hospital (Group C) &                            Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 6,000 Sq.
(c)
      Office (Group E)                                        metres
                                                              Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 3,000 Sq.
(d) Assembly (Group D)
                                                              metres
                                                              Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 8,000 Sq.
(e) Commercial (Group F)
                                                              metres
    Group G1 Industrial – I,
                                                              Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 3,000 Sq.
(f) Group G2 Industrial – II &
                                                              metres
    Group G3 Industrial - III
    Storage and warehousing                                   Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 8,000 Sq.
(g)
    (Group H)                                                 metres
                                                              Building(s) with total built-up area exceeding 500 Sq.
(h) Hazardous (Group I)
                                                              metres

 (i) Multiplex Complex (Group J)                              All buildings under this occupancy group



       Note:-      1. In Table 11 above, built-up area includes the area of existing and proposed
buildings.
Note: 2. For addition or extension to existing building(s), even if the above stipulated area/dwelling
unit limit is exceeded, approval from District Town Planner is required only if the proposed addition
or extension is either 10% or 500 Sq.m. (whichever is lower) more than the area of the existing
buildings.”

      (27) in rule 31,-




  This is a digitally signed Gazette.
  Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  52


         (a)      in sub-rule (1), for the first proviso to clause (iii) the following shall be substituted,
                  namely:-
                  “Provided that in the case of cul-de-sacs with length not exceeding 250 metres it is
                  sufficient that the cul-de-sac has not less than 5 metres width and in the case of cul-
                  de-sacs not exceeding 75 metres, it is sufficient that the cul-de-sac has not less than
                  3 metres width. Adequate maneuvering space facilities for vehicles having an area of
                  not less than 81.0 sq metre, and dimensions not less than 9.0 metres shall be
                  provided at the end of each such cul-de-sac.”
                  (b)        in sub-rule (2),
                        (i) in clause (i), for the figure and word “10 metres” the figure and word “8
                             metres” shall be substituted;
                        (ii) in clause (ii), for the figure and words “400 sq. metres” the figure and words
                             “320 sq. metres” shall be substituted;
                  (c) in clause (i) of sub-rule (3) for the figure and word “10 metres” the figure and
                         words “8 metres” shall be substituted;


               (28) for rule 33, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                  “33. Height of room.- The height of room intended for human habitation in a
                  building, excluding residential occupancy, buildings exclusively used for worship
                  with a built-up area not exceeding 100 m², and livestock/poultry farms, shall not be
                  less than 3 meters.”


               (29)     for rule 34, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   “34. Sanitation facilities.-
                      (1) Size of bathroom and latrine, urinals.-
                          (i)The area of the bathroom (Bath with shower) shall not be less than 1.50 sq.
                          metres with either side not less than 1.1 m, area of a latrine shall not be less
                          than 1.10 sq. metres with one side not less than 1.0 metre:

                          Provided that the area of the combined bathroom and latrine (Bath/ WC with
                          bath) shall be not less than 2.2 sq. metres with one side not less than 1.1
                          metres:

                          (ii) The height of bathroom or latrine shall be not less than 2.10 metres.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                   53


                       (iii) The minimum size of urinals provided shall not be less than 0.60 m x 0.70 m.

                           (2) Calculation of sanitation facilities.

                           (i) For buildings having a floor area of more than 50 sq. metres other than
                           occupancies under group A1 and stand-alone toilet blocks, sanitation facilities
                           shall be provided in numbers not less than those stipulated in Table 13 and
                           Table 14, and 15 as the case may be. The area of sanitation facilities given
                           inside the building can be deducted from the floor area for calculating
                           sanitation facilities.

                                                              TABLE 13

                                            SANITATION REQUIREMENTS


                                           Fitments required based on Floor Area of respective occupancies and part
                                                                           thereof.



                                                                                Special
                                                                                                             Bath    Bath /
                                                                                Urinals /   Wash    Wash
           Occupancy                                                   Urinal                                / WC     WC
                                            Male        Femal                   addition    basin   basins
                                                                         s                                    with    with
                                            WC          e WC                     al WC        s     Femal
                                                                       Male                                  Bath-    Bath-
                                                                                   for      male      e
                                                                                                             Male    Female
                                                                                Female



Occupancy A2 - Hotels,                      1 per       1 per          1 per     1 per      1 per   1 per      -       -
Resorts, lodging or rooming                 every       every          every     every      every   every
houses, tourist homes and the               1200        1200            300     900 m2       300     300
like                                         m2          m2             m2                   m2      m2
Occupancy A2- Boarding                      1 per       1 per          1 per     1 per      1 per   1 per    1 per    1 per
Institutions/ Hostels/                      every       every          every     every      every   every    every    every
Dormitories, seminaries/                     125         125            300     300 m2       125     125      125    125 m2
convents, orphanages, old age                m2          m2             m2                   m2      m2       m2
homes, retirement homes,
community living for senior
citizens
Occupancy B- Educational                    1 per       1 per          1 per     1 per      1 per   1 per      -       -
                                            every       every          every     every      every   every
                                             475         300            600     600 m2       475     475
                                             m2          m2             m2                   m2      m2




 This is a digitally signed Gazette.
 Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                   54


                                                                   TABLE 14
                                                SANITATION REQUIREMENTS


                Fitments required based on Floor Area of respective occupancies and part
                                                thereof.
                                                                                   Wate
                                                                             Kit
                                                                                   r tap
                                                                             che
                                                                                   with
                                                                               n
                                                                                    drai
                                                                             sink
                                    Spec                                           nage
                                                                             and
                                      ial                                          facili
                                                                             dish
                                    Urin           Was Bat Bed                     ty in
                                           Was                               was
                              Uri    als             h     h    pan                  the
  Occupancy     Mal Fem                      h                        Clea hers
                              nals for             basi wit was                    vicin
                  e    ale                 basi                        ners (W
                              Mal Fem               ns     h    hin                  ity
                WC WC                       ns                         sink her
                                e    ale/          Fem sho       g                    of
                                           male                                e
                                    addit           ale wer sink                   Wate
                                                                             kitc
                                    ional                                              r
                                                                             hen
                                     WC                                            Clos
                                                                              is
                                                                                      et
                                                                             pro
                                                                                    and
                                                                             vid
                                                                                   Urin
                                                                             ed)
                                                                                     als
Occupancy C - 1 per 1 per       -      -     1       1     1     1    1 per    1   1 per
Hospitals with    8     8                   per    per per per ward per ever
IP wards        beds beds                   30      30     8    war          war y 50
                                           beds beds bed         d             d   beds
                                                           s
Occupancy C     1 per 1 per     1 1 per 1 per 1 per -             -   1 per    -   1 per
-Hospitals with ever ever per ever ever ever                          Floo          ever
Out Door          y     y     eve      y     y       y                   r            y
Patients        1200 1200 ry         600 1200 1200                                  300
                 m2    m2 600 m2            m2     m2                                m2
                              m2
Occupancy C     1 per 1 per     1 1 per 1 per 1 per 1             -   1 per    -   1 per
-Hospital       ever ever per ever ever ever per                      floor         ever
Administration    y     y     eve      y     y       y    flo                         y
building         300 175       ry    175 300 300           or                       300
                 m2    m2 175 m2            m2     m2                                m2
                              m2




 This is a digitally signed Gazette.
 Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  55


                                                                  TABLE 15
                                               SANITATION REQUIREMENTS


                             Fitments required based on Floor Area of respective occupancies and part
                                                               thereof.
                                               Comm
                                                  on                 Special
                                                                                                Drinki
          Occupan                     Femal Water                    Urinals
Sl No                        Male                                             Wash     Wash       ng
            cy                            e     Closet Urinals          for
                             Water                                            basins basins     water
                                      Wtaer (Gende        Male Female/
                            Closet                                             male Female fountai
                                      Closet       r                addition
                                                                                                   n
                                               Neutral               al WC
                                                   )
 (1)         (2)               (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)         (7)     (8)      (9)     (10)
  1       Occupan            1 per     1 per    1 per     1 per       1 per   1 per    1 per       -
          cy D-              every     every    every     every       every   every every 2
          Assembl           900 m2      900    900 m2 600 m2          1800       2     water
          y- Bus            for the     m2     exceedi for the          m2    water    closet
          Termina             first   for the ng the       first              closet
          l and            3600 m2 first         first    1800
          other            and 1 for 3600       1800    m2 and
          Transpor           every      m2        m2      1 for
          t                addition and 1                 every
          Termina           al 1800      for             additio
          ls                   m2      every                nal
                                       additi             1800
                                        onal                m2
                                       1800
                                        m2
 2        Occupan            1 per     1 per    1 per     1 per       1 per   1 per    1 per       -
          cy D-              every     every    every     every       every   every every 2
          Assembl           725 m2      725    900 m2 600 m2          1800       2     water
          y-                for the     m2     exceedi for the          m2    water    closet
          Airport,            first   for the ng the       first              closet
          Railway          3600 m2 first         first    1800
          Stations         and 1 for 3600       1800    m2 and
                             every      m2        m2      1 for
                           addition and 1                 every
                            al 1800      for             additio
                               m2      every                nal
                                       additi             1800
                                        onal                m2
                                       1800
                                        m2




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  56


 3        Occupan    1 per    1 per   1 per                              1 per      1 per     1 per   1 per    -
          cy D-      every    every   every                              every      every     every   every
          Assembl   725 m2     725   900 m2                            180 m2     550 m2       720   720 m2
          y- Other  for the     m2   exceedi                            for the    for the   m2 for for the
                      first  for the ng the                               first      first      the    first
                   1000 m2 first       first                             1000       1000       first  1000
                   and 1 for 1000     1000                             m2 and     m2 and      1000 m2 and
                     every      m2      m2                               1 for      1 for       m2    1 for
                   1500 m2 and 1                                         every      every     and 1   every
                    for the     for                                    360 m2       1100        for   1440
                   remainin every                                       for the    m2 for     every m2 for
                     g area   1500                                     remaini        the     1440      the
                                m2                                     ng area    remaini    m2 for remaini
                             for the                                              ng area       the  ng area
                              remai                                                          remain
                               ning                                                             ing
                               area                                                            area
 4        Occupan       -        -   Minim                             Minim      Minimu     Minim Minim       -
          cy D1-                      um 2                              um 1      m 1 per     um 1    um 1
          Recreati                      per                              per       every        per     per
          onal                        every                             every      1000       every   every
          Constru                     1000                             500 m2     m2 of       1000    1000
          ctions                      m2 of                             of the       the      m2 of   m2 of
                                        the                             floor      floor        the     the
                                      floor                              area       area      floor   floor
                                       area                                                    area    area
 5        Occupan    1 per    1 per Minim                               1 per      1 per      1 per   1 per    -
          cy E-      every    every   um 1                              every      every      every   every
                    250 m2     250      per                            300 m2     900 m2       400   400 m2
                                m2    every                                                     m2
                                     900 m2
                                        for
                                     buildin
                                     gs with
                                      floor
                                       area
                                     exceedi
                                     ng 500
                                        m2
 6        Occupan       -        -   Minim                             Minim         -         -        -      -
          cy F-                       um 1                             um 1
          Commer
          cial/
          Mercant
          ile-with
          floor
          area up
          to 100




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  57


          m2


          Occupan            1 per          1 per        Minim    1 per         1 per   1 per    1 per     -
          cy F-              every          every         um 1    every         every   every    every
          Commer            300 m2           300           per   300 m2        900 m2    300    300 m2
          cial/                              m2           every                          m2
          Mercant                                        900 m2
          ile-                                              for
          Above                                          buildin
          100 m2                                         gs with
                                                          floor
                                                           area
                                                         exceedi
                                                            ng
                                                          1000
                                                           m2
 7        Occupan     1 per                 1 per            -    1 per        1 per      -       -        -
          cy G1,     every                  every                 every        every
          G2-       1200 m2                 1200                  1500         4500
          Industria                          m2                    m2           m2
          l
 8        Occupan       -                       -       Minim            -       -        -       -        -
          cy G3                                           um 1
                                                           for
                                                        built up
                                                        area up
                                                         to 750
                                                        m2 and
                                                        minimu
                                                        m 2 for
                                                        built up
                                                          area
                                                         above
                                                           750
                                                           m2.
 9        Occupan   1 per                   1 per           -          1 per   1 per      -       -        -
          cy H-    every                    every                      every   every
          Storage 2250 m2                   2250                       6000    6000
                                              m2                        m2      m2
10        Occupan 1 for the                 1 for             -        1 per   1 per      -       -      1 per
          cy I-      first                    the                      every   every                     every
          Hazardo 3000 m2                    first                     6000    6000                      3000
          us        and 1                   3000                        m2      m2                        m2
                      per                     m2
                    every                   and 1
                  addition                    per
                   al 4200                  every




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  58


                               m2           additi
                                             onal
                                            4200
                                             m2



       Note: (i)Every WC shall be provided with associated fittings such as flushing system,
       ablution tap etc.
                  (ii)    In the case of buildings proposed for a particular gender, gender specific
       sanitation facilities required as per TABLES 13, 14 and 15 shall be provided on the
       assumption that the entire building will be occupied by that particular gender.
                  (iii) In the case of buildings proposed exclusively for children upto 6 years age,
       atleast one child friendly toilet shall be provided.
       Provided that, in case the sanitation facilities of a proposed building are intended to be
       provided in an existing building, the sanitation facilities required for the entire existing
       buildings to be retained and proposed buildings in the plot, shall be incorporated as per the
       prevailing rules, subject to condition that, a minimum of one each of the specified facilities
       as stipulated in TABLES 13, 14 and 15 for different buildings as the case may be, shall be
       provided within the proposed individual building (s):
       Provided that in the case of Information technology parks/technology parks sanitation
       requirements shall be that of 75 % of the office occupancy:
       Provided further that, the mandatory sanitation requirements as stipulated in TABLES 13, 14
       and 15 for different buildings as the case may be reduced with an increase in floor area as
       stipulated in TABLE 15 A.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  59


                                                           TABLE 15 A
                                     SANITATION FACILITIES REQUIRED


                                                                         Sanitation facilities required as
                         Floor Area of the building in Sq.             percentage of the values given as in
         Sl No
                                     metres                            Table 13, 14 and 15 as the case may
                                                                                        be
           (1)                          (2)                                             (3)
            1                       Up to 2000                                        100%
            2                 Above 2000 below 5000                                    90%
            3                 Above 5000 below 8000                                    80%
            4                Above 8000 below 12000                                    70%
            5                Above 12000 below 18000                                   60%
            6                     Above 18000                                          50%

       Provided further that, in the case of hazardous occupancy buildings, where the total number
       of workers does not exceed 5, at least one water closet shall be provided.
        (3) Segregated sanitation for Visitors
              (a) In respect of the following new buildings, special segregated sanitation facility,
               having entry from common area, shall be provided within the building or plot.
                             (i) Civil stations, Municipal offices, Taluk offices, Village offices;
                             (ii) Any other office in plots owned by Government or Municipality as
                             decided by the Government or Municipality respectively from time to time;
                            (iii) Hospitals with total built-up area more than 1000 sq.metres;
                            (iv) Bus stations, railway stations, airports and public water transport
                                   terminals;
                            (v) Automobile fuel filling stations.
                  (b) Such sanitation facility shall be at least 10 percent of the sanitation requirement
                  stipulated in Tables 14 and 15 for water closets, urinals and wash basins subject to a
                  minimum of one WC, urinal and washbasin each for male, one WC and washbasin
                  each for female and one WC and washbasin each for disabled persons. The minimum
                  standards for WC and Washbasin for disabled shall be as stipulated in rule 42.
                  (c) It must be accessible to visitors and general public during the operational hours of
                  the building.
                  (d) In the case of buildings exclusively intended for sanitation facilities, the rules




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  60


                  other than for parking and sanitation requirements applicable to Group F occupancy
                  buildings shall be followed.
        (4) In the case of Government owned Information Technology Parks, Government
        approved Private Information Technology Parks, Government approved private Information
        Technology buildings under Group E occupancy, additional sanitation facilities for visitors
        need not be provided.”


         (30)      in rule 35,-
            (a) in sub-rule (1), for clause (5) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “Any building having more than three floors including basement floor(s), excluding
                the stair cabins, shall have at least two staircases, one of which may be a fire escape
                staircase”
            (b) in sub-rule (1), for clause (6) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “(6) Escalators can be provided in addition to staircases. The width of such escalators
                  shall not be less than one metre.”
            (c)            in sub-rule (2), for clause (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “(1) Fire escape staircase shall be provided for every building under:-
                  (a) Residential occupancy exceeding three storeys (excluding stair cabins), above the
                       lowest floor of the building, excluding basement floors.
                  (b) Non-residential occupancies exceeding two storeys (excluding stair cabins)
                       above the lowest floor of the building excluding basement floors.
                  (c) The fire stair shall be extended to the lowermost basement floor, if the number of
                       basement floors is more than two.
                  (d) In case of a podium, the fire escape stair shall be provided along the external wall
                       of the tower up to the podium level and shall continue by abutting along the
                       external wall of the podium.”
         (31)      in rule 36, for sub-rule (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
              “(2) Emergency exits shall be located in such a way that the maximum travel distance
              measured along the path of travel, for every occupant on each floor, shall not exceed 45
              meters for fully sprinklered buildings and 30 metres for other buildings.”
         (32)      in rule 37,-
            (i) in sub-rule (3), for TABLE 17 the following shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  61


                                                               TABLE 17
                                                        OCCUPANT LOAD

                                                                          Occupant load (Built Up area
      Sl No                                   Occupancy
                                                                            in sq. metres per person)

        (1)                               (2)                                         (3)
         1           Group A1- Residential                                           12.5
                     Group A2- Lodging Houses/ Special
          2          Residential                                                      4.0
          3          Group B- Educational                                             4.0
          4          Group C-Medical/ Hospital                                       15.0
          5          Group D - Assembly                                               1.5
          6          Group E - Office                                                10.0
          7          Group F - Mercantile/ Commercial                                 4.5
          8          Group G1- Industrial I                                          10.0
          9          Group G2 - Industrial II                                        10.0
         10          Group H - Storage (Including warehousing)                       30.0
         11          Group I - Hazardous                                             10.0
         12          Group J-Multiplex complex                                        4.5


            (ii) in sub-rule (5) the words “or both” shall be omitted;
            (iii) for sub-rule (6), the following shall be substituted, namely:-

                  “For determining the exit width of staircase(s), the width of flight(s), either upstairs
                  or downstairs, is considered.”


       (33)       in rule 39, for the figure “1.0” the figure “1.2” shall be substituted.
       (34)       after rule 39, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:-
            “39A Parapets/ Guard Rails- Where access is provided over the terrace floor or to
            balconies open on any side, the edges of the terrace floor/ balconies shall be provided
            with parapet walls/ guard rails made of suitable materials to a height of not less than 120
            centimetres. The spacing between the grills/ rails should be less than 10 centimetres.”
         (35)        in rule 41, sub-rule (7) shall be omitted.
         (36)        in rule 42,
              (a) after the letters and symbols “A2, B,C,D,E,F,” the letters and symbols “G1, G2”
                     shall be added;
               (b)        for sub-rule (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  62


                  “(2) Every building, other than single/dual unit residential exceeding 1000 sq.
                  metres and residential flats exceeding 2500 sq. metres built-up area, having more
                  than one floor, shall have lift or separate approach through a ramp (intended for the
                  differently-abled and elderly) to each floor.”
               (c) in sub-rule (4),-
                  (i) for the words “A minimum of one special water closet shall be provided for the
                  use of the differently-abled and elderly with essential provision of a wash basin at an
                  easily accessible location with proper signages:” the following words shall be
                  substituted, namely:-
                    “Among the water closet facilities required as per these rules, a minimum of one
                    special water closet shall be provided for the use of the differently-abled and
                    elderly with essential provision of a wash basin at an easily accessible location
                    with proper signages:”
                  (ii) in item (a), for the words “These shall be provided at the ground floor” the
                      words “These shall be provided at the floor with the main entrance, accessible
                      through a ramp,” shall be substituted;
               (d) after item (g) the following item shall be added, namely:-
                  "(h) Such toilets shall be located at suitable locations facilitating easy access for
                    wheelchairs"
               (e) in sub-rule (5), before the figure and symbol “3%” the words “Among the car
                    parking facilities required as per these rules,” shall be inserted;
               (f) after clause (8), the following clause shall be added, namely:-
                  “(9) In the case of resort cottage buildings under group A2 special residential
                  occupancy, accommodating single/dual units having built up area not more than
                  100m2 per cottage building, the facilities stipulated as per this rule shall be provided
                  for one cottage building per every 15 such cottage buildings or part there of in the
                  plot.”
         (37)      in rule 45,-
             (i) in sub-rule (4), after the existing proviso the following proviso shall be inserted,
                 namely:-
                “Provided further that, the height of any work room shall not be less than 3 metres
                measured from the floor level to the lowest point in the ceiling for Group G1




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  63


                occupancy buildings which are included under the white category of the prevailing
                statutes of the Kerala State Pollution Control Board, having built up area less than 200
                sq.m.”
            (ii) after sub-rule (6), the following shall be inserted, namely:-
                  “(7) The Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Town Planner, notify areas
                  for the construction of flatted factories specifying permissible FSI, Coverage, Height
                  etc.”
         (38)      in rule 48, for the words “Single family residential buildings” the words
         “Residential buildings” shall be substituted.
         (39)      In sub-rule (3) of rule 50 of the words "dimension with regard to building parts"
         shall be omitted.

         (40)      in Rule 54, after sub-rule (4) the following shall be added, namely:-

              “(5) In the case of buildings within a layout, the distance between individual buildings
              with height upto 10 m shall not be less than 1.25 m."

         (41)      in rule 64, in sub-rule (2), for clause (1) the following shall be substituted, namely:-

             "For buildings up to 10 m under various occupancies, the mandatory open space/setback
             from the proposed road boundary to the building shall be reduced by the breadth of the
             land so surrendered from that side, subject to the minimum of 2.0m from the boundary
             of the proposed road.”

         (42)      in rule 66, for the words “construction or reconstruction of wall with or without
         door(s), shutter(s) on the side abutting such road, without structural alteration” the words
         “strengthening of the remaining structure without any further extension in the surrendered
         side, without change in built up area and number of floors of the remaining structure." shall
         be substituted.

         (43)      in rule 67, after the words “keeping agricultural implements, tools,” the words
         figure and letters “or for watching crops or kennel having maximum built up area of 10
         square meters, all incidental to Group A1 residential, Group B -Educational and Group F-
         Mercantile/Commercial occupancy buildings” shall be inserted.
         (44)      for rule 68, the following shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  64


              “Temporary shed-(1) The Secretary may grant permission to a person to erect for a
              specified period of not more than sixty days, sheds of a purely temporary nature,
              exhibition halls, temporary amusement facilities such as giant wheels and the like, on
              general conditions as may be fixed by the Council.
                 (2) The Secretary may grant permission to a person to erect for a specified period of
                 not more than one hundred and eighty days, structures purely of temporary nature for
                 hot mix plant or concrete mix plant, intended for the constructions under public
                 ownership, on general conditions as may be fixed by the Council.
                 (3) Application for permission to erect such sheds or hot mix plant or concrete mix
                 plant purely of temporary nature, shall be submitted in white paper typed or written
                 in ink, affixed with necessary court fee stamp or through online platforms and
                 accompanied by document to prove ownership or consent of the owner, if the land is
                 not owned by the applicant.
                 (4) The Secretary shall, if convinced of the ownership, issue permission with or
                 without condition and specifying the period beyond which such sheds or hot mix
                 plant or concrete mix plant of purely temporary nature, shall not be retained.
                 (5) The permit issued for such sheds or hot mix plant or concrete mix plant of purely
                 temporary nature, shall not be extended/ renewed beyond the period stipulated in the
                 permit.
                 (6) The Secretary may, on the failure of the person to demolish or dismantle such
                 shed or hot mix plant or concrete mix plant, at the expiry of the period specified in
                 the permit, cause it to be demolished or dismantled and the cost there of shall be
                 recovered from such person as if it were an arrear of property tax due under the
                 Act.”.
         (45)      for rule 74, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
               “74. Construction of additional sheet/tiled roof over the terrace of certain
               single/dual unit residential buildings-
                  (1) In the case of single/dual unit residential buildings up to three storeys and having
                  height not exceeding 10 metres, additional sheet/tiled sloping roof may be
                  constructed, over the terrace floor of such building if,
                      (a) such additional construction over the terrace is done for extra protection of
                      such terrace from rain, and not for any habitable use;




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  65


                      (b) the vertical distance between the terrace and the lowest point of the roof of the
                      additional construction over the terrace does not exceed 2.40 metres;
                      (c) such additional roofed terrace area is kept open on all sides and not enclosed
                      fully or even partly with wall / grill / window/ shutter / any type of partition or the
                      like, other than:-
                             (i) parapet wall of height upto 1.20 metres,
                             (ii) columns to support such additional roof,
                             (iii)portion of such building, including the stair cabin leading to the terrace if
                             any,
                             (iv) other structures such as water tank, rainwater harvesting arrangements
                             and the like, complementary to the terrace area;
                      (d) any projection of such additional roof into the mandatory yard is in accordance
                      with the provisions contained in these rules; and
                      (e) the building, comply with the provisions of the Act and any other law
                      applicable.
                  (2) Such terrace area covered with additional roof as in sub rule (1) shall not be
                  reckoned to calculate built-up area as per these rules.
                  (3) Under no circumstance, the height of building including the height of such
                  additional roof, shall qualify that for a high-rise building.
                  (4) Mandatory clearances, certificates of approval, NOC, concurrences etc. as per
                  these rules or bye laws made under the Act and any other law shall be obtained
                  wherever applicable.
                  (5) Construction of additional sheet / tiled roof over the terrace of buildings other
                  than that specified in sub rule (1) shall be considered as another floor and shall be
                  taken for the calculation of all mandatory requirements as per these rules.
         (46)      after rule 74, the following shall be inserted, namely:-,

              74(A). Sheet roofing shall be permissible in the front and rear yards of A1 occupancy
              buildings with built up area upto 300 Sqm, such that it shall be open on three sides,
              covering a maximum area of 15 Sqm in the respective yard and having a minimum
              distance of 60cm from any road boundary abutting such yards. In such cases, it shall be
              ensured that Rain water from the sheet roof is discharged within applicant's plot itself.”

         (47)      in rule 75,-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  66


            (a) in sub-rule (2) for the words and figure “within a distance of 7.5 metres radius from
                 any existing well” the words and figure “within a minimum distance of 7.5 metres
                 from any existing well” shall be substituted;
            (b) in sub-rule (5), for the words and symbols “tube wells,” the words “bore wells” shall
                 be substituted.
            (c) for sub-rule (6), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                "Validity and extension- The permit once issued exclusively for the construction of
                wells shall be valid for five years.".
         (48)      in rule 76,-
                (a) in clause (1) of sub-rule (1), after the words “roof top rainwater” the words and
                   figure “for building situated in the terrain having a slope not exceeding 20 degrees
                   with the horizontal” shall be inserted;
                (b) in sub-rule (2), for clause (1) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                   "Unless otherwise stipulated specifically in a Master Plan, Detailed Town Planning
                   Scheme/ Interim Development Order issued under the Kerala Town and Country
                   Planning Act, 2016 (Act 9 of 2016), for any new building construction having built-
                   up area exceeding 300 m² under all occupancies other than group H, workable
                   rainwater storage arrangements shall be provided as an integral part of the
                   construction, through the collection of rooftop rainwater"


         (49)      for rule 77, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
              “77. Solar Energy Installations.- (1) The following categories of new buildings with
              total built-up area exceeding 500 sq. metres under the occupancies Group A1, A2, C
              and D shall be provided with Solar Energy Installations (Photovoltaic power station, or
              PV system), having a minimum capacity as stipulated in Table 19.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  67


                                                             TABLE 19
                                                       Minimum capacity of Solar energy installations
                     Occupancy                        (KW) to be provided, per m2 of the built-up area
                                                                      of the building
                      (1)                                                   (2)
             A1- Single/ Dual unit
                                                                          0.0023
                  Residential
             A1- Apartment houses/
                                                                          0.0017
               Residential Flats
                      A2                                                  0.0027
                       C                                                  0.0033
                       D                                                  0.0050

                (2) Details of the panel area, capacity, proposed energy generation, and the overall
                capacity of the Solar Energy Installation (Photovoltaic power station or PV system)
                shall be submitted along with the applications for the permit and occupancy
                certificate.


                (3) The Secretary shall, before issuing the occupancy certificate, ensure that all new
                buildings mentioned above have completed the installation of Solar Energy
                Installations as stipulated by this rule.”
         (50)      in rule 78, sub-rule (6) shall be omitted.
         (51)      in rule 79,-
            (a)       in sub-rule (2) the following words, figures and symbols shall be added, namely:-
                (2a) “ However, leach pit, sock pit, refuse pit, or septic tank – if entirely underground -
                may be located within the building, provided such area has at least one of its sides
                open to a minimum height of 2.40 metres.”.
            (b)      for sub-rule (3), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “Every new residential building of built-up area exceeding 300 sq. metres shall be
                provided with suitable systems for the disposal of biodegradable waste unless there
                exists an organized system for the collection and disposal of such waste.”
            (c)      for sub-rule (5) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “In wedding halls, proper and adequate arrangements for collection and hygienic
                disposal of solid and liquid waste shall be provided.”
            (d) for sub-rule (6) the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “Water Reuse for gardening etc.: All buildings under Group A1 (Residential




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  68


                apartments only) and A2 occupancy, having total built-up area more than 2000
                sq.metres, that are not connected to any public sewerage system or sewage treatment
                plants and all buildings under B, C, D, E, F and J occupancies having total built-up
                area more than 5000 sq.metres and all buildings under G1, G2 and I occupancy other
                than Fuel Filling Stations, where there is industrial effluent discharge, shall incorporate
                in-situ liquid waste treatment plant and special provision for reusing treated waste
                water generated out of the use of water.”.
         (52)      for rule 89 the following shall be substituted, namely:-
            “89. Deviation during construction and power of Secretary to require alteration in
            work.-
                 (1) In case any deviations are intended to be made on an approved permit, before the
                 submission of a completion report, an application for a revised permit shall be
                 submitted, incorporating revised plans and drawings along with other details as
                 stipulated in rule 6 of this rule for the intended construction.
                 Provided that, in the case of an application for a revised permit involving deviations
                 from the approved permit, before commencement of the construction with deviation,
                 the permit fee for the portion proposed to be deviated from the approved permit,
                 calculated based on the prevailing rate, after deducting the fee already paid for that
                 portion, shall be remitted:
                 Provided further that, in the case of an application for a revised permit, where the
                 construction with deviation from the approved permit has commenced, double the
                 permit fee for the portion where the construction deviated from permit has already
                 commenced, and permit fee for the remaining portion requiring deviation from the
                 permit, calculated based on the prevailing rate, after deducting the fee already paid
                 for these portions, shall be remitted:
                 Provided also that, in the case of a revised permit, the date of expiry of the permit
                 shall be that of the original permit:
                 Provided also that no permit is necessary for effecting deviations such as changing the
                 position of the building or construction proposed within the plot, shifting the position
                 of access to plots in the case of layouts and shifting the position of rooms, stairs, lifts,
                 windows, doors or ventilators and their sizes in the case of building constructions if




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  69


                they do not conflict with these rules. The deviations mentioned in this proviso shall be
                incorporated in the completion plan and submitted along with the completion report.
                (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) revised permit is not
                necessary for any deviation from the approved plan if,
                    (a) It does not violate any of the regulatory provisions of these rules or the Act or
                    Master Plan or Town Planning Scheme or any applicable statute, and does not result
                    in a change of occupancy of the building; and
                    (b) The occupancy-wise built-up area so deviated does not exceed 10% of the
                    occupancy-wise built-up area in the approved plan.
                Provided that such deviations shall be incorporated in the completion plan and
                submitted along with the completion report, for which the Secretary shall issue the
                occupancy certificate after levying double the permit fee for such additionally
                constructed area, if any.
                (3) Where it comes to the notice of the Secretary that a work:-
                   (i) is not in accordance with the plans or specifications approved;
                   (ii) is in contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or these rules, bylaws or
                   declarations made thereunder;
                    He may, by notice, require the person for whom such work is done:-
                 (a) to make such alterations as may be specified in the notice with the object of
                 bringing the work in conformity with the plans or specifications approved or the
                 provisions so contravened; or
                 (b) to show cause why such alterations should not be made; within such period as
                 may be specified in the notice:
                  Provided that any construction carried out in deviation of the approved plan or
                  specific conditions, shall not be required to be altered as per the approved plan if
                  such construction does not violate the provisions or specific conditions contained in
                  the Act or these rules.
                (4) Where the person to whom the notice under sub-rule (3) is issued does not show
                cause as aforesaid, he shall be bound to make the alterations specified in such notice.
                (5) Where the person to whom the notice under sub-rule (3) is issued shows sufficient
                cause as aforesaid, the Secretary may, cancel the notice and in other cases, by order
                confirm or modify the notice.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  70


                (6) In the case where in the owner(s), of the plots upon which the permit/ layout
                approval was issued, requires to cancel the permit prior to filing the completion
                certificate, the application for permit/ layout approval cancellation shall be submitted
                to the authority who had originally issued the permit/ layout approval. The issued
                permit/ layout approval shall be cancelled by the issuing authority, upon scrutinizing
                of such applications.
                (7) At any point of time more than one permit/layout approval shall not be issued for
                construction(s) in the same plot(s).”.
         (53)        in rule 92, for the third proviso the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
            “Provided further that permit may be granted for continuing works already commenced
            without obtaining permit after levying a fee of two times the permit fee for such part
            already constructed and permit fee for the remaining unconstructed part.”:
         (54)        in rule 99,-
             (a) in the first proviso to sub-rule (5), for the figures and words “30 days” and “60
                    days” the figures and words                       “90 days” and “180 days” shall be substituted,
                    respectively;
             (b) sub-rule (7) shall be omitted
         (55)        rule 102 shall be omitted.
         (56)        in the APPENDIX
              (i)          in Appendix A1,-
                    (a) for Sl.No.5 and the entries against it the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                    “(i) Whether the land proposed for construction is assigned land or not: Yes /No
                      (ii) If so, the purpose for which assignment is made :                                     ”

                    (b) for SL. No. 20 and the entries against it , the following shall be substituted,
         namely:-

                    “20.                                                CERTIFICATE
                             Certified that the building plan is prepared in accordance with the provisions
                    in the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019 Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 and
                    the provisions contained in the sanctioned Town Planning Schemes, if any.
                Also certified that the drawings and documents enclosed along with this application
                include all the details as stipulated as per rule 6 and other relevant sections of these




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  71


                rules as applicable.


                Place:                                                               Signature:
                Date:                                                                Name:
                Reg. No.:
                Address:
                (Registered Institution/Architect/ Engineer/ Town
                Planner/Supervisor)“
              (ii)         in Appendix A1A,-
                (a) for Sl.No.5 and the entries against it the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                “(i) Whether the land proposed for construction is assigned land or not: Yes /No
                 (ii) If so, the purpose for which assignment is made :                             ”
                (b) The word “empanelled” whereever they occur shall be omitted;
                (c) for SL. No. 19 and the entries against it the following shall be substituted,
                namely:-
                “19.                                                   CERTIFICATE
                Certified that the building plan is prepared in accordance with the provisions in the
                Kerala Municipality Act, 1994, the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019 and the
                provisions contained in the sanctioned Town Planning Schemes, if any.


                Also certified that the drawings and documents enclosed along with this application
                include all the details as stipulated as per rule 6 and other relevant provisions of the
                Act and the rules as applicable.


                Place:                                                               Signature:
                Date:                                                                Name:
                Reg. No.:
                Address:
                (Registered Institution/Architect/ Engineer/ Town
                Planner/Supervisor)
              (iii)         in Appendix A1B,-
                (a) the word “empanelled” shall be omitted




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  72


                (b) the title of the form “ACKNOWLEDGEMENT RECEIPT” shall be substituted
                with “ACKNOWLEDGEMENT CERTIFICATE”
              (iv)         in Appendix A4,
                (a) for Sl.No.5 and the entries against it the following, shall be substituted namely:-
                “(i) Whether the land proposed for construction is assigned land or not: Yes /No
                  (ii) If so, the purpose for which assignment is made :                               ”
                (b) for SL. No. 20 and the entries against it, the following shall be substituted,
                namely:-
                “20.                                                   CERTIFICATE
                Certified that the building plan is prepared in accordance with the provisions in the
                Kerala Municipality Act 1994, the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019, and the
                provisions contained in the sanctioned Town Planning Schemes, if any.


                Also certified that the drawings and documents enclosed along with this application
                include all the details as stipulated as per rule 6 and other relevant provisions of these
                Act and the rules as applicable.


                Place:                                                               Signature:
                Date:                                                                Name:
                Reg. No.:
                Address:
                (Registered Institution/Architect/ Engineer/ Town
                Planner/Supervisor)                                                                ”
           (v) in Appendix A5, for Sl.No.5 and the entries against it, the following shall be
                substituted, namely:-
                “(i) Whether the land proposed for construction is assigned land or not: Yes /No
                  (ii) If so, the purpose for which assignment is made :                           ”
           (vi)             in Appendix F2A, the word “empanelled” shall be omitted;
           (vii)           the following Form shall be added as Appendix A1C, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                    73


                                                          APPENDIX- A1C
                                                            (See rule 5(3))
              ACKNOWLEDGEMENT CERTIFICATE FOR BUILDING IN PLOTS OWNED BY
            CENTRAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT OR BY ANY LOCAL SELF
                                                   GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS

                  …...................... Municipal Corporation/Municipal council/Town Panchayat/Grama
                                                                        Panchayat




No…………………..                                                                         Dated……………….
Details of application

   1.        Application No. :

   2.         Name of authorized person :

   3.        Name of Architect/ Engineer in charge:

   4.             Occupancy of the proposed construction:

    5.        Floor area of the proposed construction:

   6.        Date of receipt of application:

             It is hereby acknowledged that the application for self certified building permit submitted
             by Sri/Smt………………………..has been received in this office on ……………..




                                                                    Office seal          Name and Signature

                                                                                        Official Designation

             Place:

             Date:


         (viii)         the following Form shall be inserted as Appendix A6, namely:-




  This is a digitally signed Gazette.
  Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  74


                                                       “APPENDIX- A6

                                                            (See rule 5(3))



                INTIMATION FOR BUILDING DETAILS PROPOSED IN PLOTS OWNED BY
           CENTRAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT OR BY ANY LOCAL SELF
                                               GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS,

          …………………………..                                          Municipal Corporation / Municipal council /
                                           Town Panchayat/Grama Panchayat

           1.         Name of the Department/ Institution :


                      (i)     Office address

           2.         Nature of development / construction

                      (i)     New construction          :

                      (ii)    Reconstruction :

                      (iii) Alteration / Addition / Extension :

                      (iv) Change in occupancy :

           3.         Details of plot

    (i)         Revenue Village                :

    (ii)        (a)         Survey No.         :

                       (b) ResurveyNo. :

     (iii) Sub Division                        :

     (iv) Taluk                                :

     (v) District                              :




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  75


     (vi) Extent in Sq.m.                      :

          (vii) Nature of ownership:

                  Building No. 1                                                      Building No. 2
                  Occupancy:                                                          Occupancy :
                  Height of the building ………m                                         Height of the building
Floors                                                                                ……….m
                                 Built-            Area provided            Floor         Built-        Area
                    Use             up             for        parking       area      Use      up       provided
                                   area            inside             the   (Sq.m.)            area     for
                                   (Sq.            building                                    (Sq.     parking
                                   m.)             (Sq.m.)                                     m.)       inside the
                                                                                                         building
                                                                                                         (Sq.m.)
Baseme
nt floor
Groun
d floor



Total
     (viii) Total Built-up Area                :

     (ix) Total Covered Area                   :

  (x)      Total parking area provided inside the building(s)                         :

  (xi)Total Floor Area:

         4.      Basic Kerala Municipality Building Rule Verification with respect to proposed plot




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  76


                         Sl.     Rule              Description                Required /       Provided
                     No.          No.                                        permissible
                      1                        Access width to
                                               the plot
                         2                     Coverage
                         3                     Floor Space
                                   Index
        5.       Basic Kerala Municipality Building Rule verification with respect to proposed
                 building(s)
                 (a) Building No. 1


          Sl.        Ru                          Description                        Required      Provided
          No.        le                                                             /
                     No                                                             permissib
                     .                                                              le
          (1)                                   (2)                                      (3)          (4)
           1                    Access width to the building (in m)
                                Minimum distance from the
                                abutting        road/access            to   other
             2                  building(s) (in metre)
             3                  No. of Four-wheeler parking
             4                  Area of Two-wheeler parking
             5                  No. of Parking for Differently abled
             6                  No. of Parking for Visitors
                                Loading/unloading space (in sq.
             7
                                metre)
                                Set Backs (in metre)
                                Front
             8                  Side 1
                                Side 2
                                Rear
           9                    Exit Width (in metre)
           10                   No. of Stair case(s)
           11                   No. of Fire Escape Stair case(s)
           12                   Rainwater storage capacity (in litre)




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                     77


                                 Connected          load        in        kW    for
                                 buildings coming under rule 2.1
            13                   and 2.2 of the Kerala State Energy
                                 Conservation
                                 Building code rules 2017
   6. Provisions of Town Planning Schemes, if any, applicable to the construction

   (i) Zoning

                         Name of                       Stage                                    Permissibility of
            Sl.           the TP                  (Sanctioned/                 Zone          proposed construction
            No           Scheme                    Published)                                  as per the scheme
              .
            (1)                 (2)                       (3)                  (4)                    (5)




     (ii) Road Widening

                 Nam             Stage            Existi         Propose                           Set Back     Set back
     Sl.                                                                              Buildi
                  e of       (Sanctione              ng          d Width                           Required        provide
     No                                                                              ng Line
                  the                 d/          Width              of road                         from          d (in m)
        .                                                                             (in m)
                  TP         Published)              of               (in m)                       Existing

                 Sche                              road                                              road

                  me                              (in m)                                           boundary
                                                                                                    (in m)
   (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)                (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)

   7.         Permissibility with respect to the Kerala Conservation of Paddy Land and Wetland Act
   2008/Kerala Land Utilization order 1967

                          (i)     Type of land as per BTR :
                          (ii)    Type of land as per Data Bank :

   8.         Details of permit/approved plan already obtained.

   9.         Details of fee paid:             Application fee:                 Layout scrutiny fee:




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  78


                       (i)     Amount

                       (ii)    No. and date of receipt

   10.         Details of documents, plans, certificate, etc. enclosed.

    11.         Details of NOC obtained.

              Sl.No.          Requir        Whether                   Details of the NOC / Clearances
                               ed           enclosed
                                              or not
               (1)             (2)             (3)                                 (4)



     12.                                         DECLARATION


         I,                                                                                                    hereby


         declare that the measurements, specifications and other details mentioned above are
         correct, complete and true to the best of my knowledge and belief and that I shall abide by
         the approved plan and the provisions in the Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 and the Kerala
         Municipality Building Rules, 2019 in undertaking the construction.




       Authorised Person                                                       Architect/ Engineer in charge
       Name:                                                                   Name:
       Designation:                                                            Designation:




       Signature:                                                              Signature:




       Date:                                                                   Date:




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  79




       (ix)     in Appendix F2, the following Table shall be inserted after the paragraph ending with
                the words “occupation/use”.

                “Details of the construction

                                                                      Building

              Existing area

                       Floor                       Occupancy                 Built up area in   Floor area in
                                                                             square metres      square metres

              …………

              Basement 1

              Ground

              First

              ………………

              ………………

                                  Total

              Proposed area

                       Floor                       Occupancy                Built up area in    Floor area in
                                                                             square metres      square metres

              …………

              Basement 1

              Ground

              First

              ………………




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  80



             ………………

                                  Total

                (i) Built up area of other buildings existing in the plot …………………..

                (ii) Total built up area (sq. metres) (existing + proposed) ……………….

                (iii) Total floor area (sq. metres) (existing + proposed) …………………

                (iv) Total covered area (sq. metres) (existing + proposed) ………………”

       (x)      in Appendix F2A,-
             1. the following Table shall be inserted after the paragraph ending with the words
                  “occupation/use”

                “Details of the construction

                                                                      Building

             Existing area

                       Floor                       Occupancy                 Built up area in   Floor area in
                                                                             square metres      square metres

             …………

             Basement 1

             Ground

             First

             ………………

             ………………

                                  Total

             Proposed area




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  81



                       Floor                       Occupancy           Built up area in   Floor area in
                                                                       square metres      square metres

              …………

              Basement 1

              Ground

              First

              ………………

              ………………

                                  Total

                (i) Built up area of other buildings existing in the plot …………………..

                (ii) Total built up area (sq. metres) (existing + proposed) ……………….

                (iii) Total floor area (sq. metres) (existing + proposed) …………………

                (iv) Total covered area (sq. metres) (existing + proposed) ………………”

              2. in the title, after the words “low risk buildings”, the words “and medium risk
                  industrial buildings” shall be inserted
       (xi)     in Appendix H2,-
                a. for the items (i) and (ii) in column (3) Function, against category (1) Engineer A
                      in column (1) the following items shall be substituted, namely:-
                      “(i) To sign plans, drawings and specifications in connection with development
                      permit for area upto the extent of two hectare.
                      (ii)To issue certificates of supervision in connection with development permit for
                      areas upto the extent of two hectare pertaining to road work, water supply,
                      drainage, sewerage and light installations.”
                b. for the items (i) and (ii) in column (3) Function, against category (1), Engineer B,
                      in column (1) the following item shall be substituted, namely:-
                      “(i) To sign plans, drawings and specifications in connection with development
                      permit for area upto the extent of one hectare.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  82


                      (ii) To issue certificates of supervision in connection with development permit for
                      areas upto the extent of one hectare pertaining to road work, water supply,
                      drainage, sewerage and light installations.”
                c. for the items (i) and (ii) in column (3) Function, against category (1), Town
                      Planner B, in column (1) the following item shall be substituted, namely:-
                      “(i) To sign plans, drawings and specifications in connection with development
                      permit for an area up to two hectares
                        (ii) To issue certificate of supervision for development permit for an area up to
                        two hectares”
                d. (i) after item (i) in column (2), Qualifications against category (1), Supervisor B,
                      the following item shall be inserted, namely:-
                          “(ia) One year Architectural Assistantship with seven years’ experience under
                          an Architect or Engineer; or
                      (ii) in item (iii) in column (2), Qualifications against category (1) Supervisor B,
                      after the words ‘Civil Engineering’ the symbol and word “/Architecture” shall be
                      inserted
          (xii)       Appendix K(a) shall be omitted.
          (xiii)      Appendix K(b) shall be omitted.
          (xiv)       Appendix K(c) shall be omitted.
          (xv)        Appendix K(d) shall be omitted.
          (xvi)       In Appendix L, for the entries under the heading “SELF DECLARATION
                      FORM” the following shall be substituted, namely:-
                "I do hereby declare that all the measurements mentioned in the civil plan are correct
                and complete.
   I also hereby declare that all the required fire protection arrangements as listed in the National
   Building Code will be installed in the building and will be made ready for inspection and
   testing prior to issuing occupancy certificate for the building."
         (xvii)      in Appendix M,-

                             a. the letter, figure, bracket and word “R 28 (Access)” in column (2) against
                                  the entries “Rules not considered for exemption from these rules” in
                                  serial No.2 in column (1) shall be omitted;
                             b. for the TABLE under the heading “Criteria and Fee for exemption” the
                                  following TABLE shall be substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  83




  SL.             Rules/Occupancy                                      Criteria              Exemption Fee
  No.
  (1)                        (2)                                         (3)                       (4)
  1          Rule 26 - exterior and                 Constructions which are deficient     1) Deficient by up to
             interior open space                    up to 15 % (including tolerance as    10% 2 times that of
             (except R 26 (3) )                     specified in rule 20(3) of the        the permit fee. 2)
                                                    mandatory exterior and interior       Above10 up to 15%
                                                    open space as per Rule will only      4 times that of
                                                    be considered for exemption.          permit fee
  2          Rule 27 - Coverage                     Constructions which exceeds up        Fair value of land in
                                                    to 5 % of the permissible value as    rupees per sq.m
                                                    per this rule will only be            multiplied          by
                                                    considered for exemption              additional      plinth
                                                                                          area in excess of that
                                                                                          permissible as per
                                                                                          this rule+ Rs 8000
                                                                                          per sq m of built up
                                                                                          area in excess of that
                                                                                          permissible as per
                                                                                          the rule.
  3          Rule 29- Parking                       Constructions which are deficient     Fair value of land in
                                                    up to 10 % of the permissible         rupees per sqm
                                                    value as per this Rule will only be   multiplied by 15
                                                    considered for exemption              sqm per parking
                                                                                          subject      to      a
                                                                                          minimum of Rs
                                                                                          3,00,000           per
                                                                                          deficient car parking
  4          Other               Rules-             The authority for exemption can 2 times that of the
             R32(Mezzanine floor),                  consider all other rules for permit fee for each
             R33(Height of rooms)                   exemption taking in to account rule to be exempted
             R             34(sanitation            the type of construction and
             facilities), R 35(1) (stair            condition of site, subjected to a
             cases), R 35(2) (fire                  maximum deviation of 10% of
             escape       stair    case)            the requirement
             R35(3)-Ramp, R (37)
             exit      width       R38-
             doorways,              R39
             corridor, R41 (2 to 6)-
             details of light and
             ventilation, 43 (Other




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  84


             provisions           for
             apartment buildings),
             R44(Other provisions
             for assembly buildings),
             R 45 (other provisions
             regarding Group G1 ),
             R 46-(other provisions
             regarding Group H ),
             R49 (special provisions
             for hut),R 50(special
             provisions           for
             construction in small
             plot), R 51(special
             provisions for row
             buildings), Rules under
             chapter VIII (provisions
             for construction under
             approved      schemes),
             Rules under chapter XI
             (Accessory     buildings
             and sheds)
  5          Rule 28-Access                         Exemption       will  only    be 2 times that of the
                                                    considered       in   case    of permit fee
                                                    addition/extension/new
                                                    construction in plots where the
                                                    building(s) which have been
                                                    constructed/are            under
                                                    construction as per a valid
                                                    building permit issued before
                                                    08.11.2019 wherein, the permit
                                                    had been issued taking into
                                                    account two abutting independent
                                                    motorable roads, each having
                                                    width not less than 5 metres, as
                                                    access to the plot.



           (xviii)         in Appendix N, after the existing Table, the following Table shall be added,
   namely:-
   Rules for which exemptions are requested:




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  85



                  Rule                                                 Required as   Provided as
   No.                                  Rule description                                                 Remarks
                 Number                                                 per rule       per site

   (1)               (2)                          (3)                      (4)           (5)               (6)




           (xix)           in Appendix O,-
                (a) The word “empanelled” wherever they occur shall be omitted;
                (b) in the instruction after Encl: for the words “acknowledgement receipt” the words
                “acknowledgement certificate” shall be substituted.
                      (xii) after Appendix O, the following Appendix shall be added, namely:-


                                                              “APPENDIX O1
                                                               [See rule 5 (3)]
                                            SELF-CERTIFIED BUILDING PERMIT
           FOR BUILDING IN PLOTS OWNED BY CENTRAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT
              DEPARTMENT OR BY ANY LOCAL SELF GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS


…………………………………………………………. Municipal Corporation / Municipal
council                        /                     Town                   Panchayat/Grama                 Panchayat
No………………………………………….Dated….………………                                                               Ref:—       Application
dated……………………….from Sri./Smt. ……………………. This is the site approval and
self-certified building permit for the construction / reconstruction / erection / re-erection /
addition / alteration of building…………………………….. (specify the construction) in
building No. ……………………… or near the building No………………..................in Survey /
Resurvey                       No.……………………………….                                        Village………………………
Taluk………………………………………District………………………………
…………………………for………………………………………                                                           (specify    the     occupancy)
purpose subject to the conditions stated below:




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  86


 1) ………………………………………………………………………………………
 2) ………………………………………………………………………………………
 3) ………………………………………………………………………………………
 4) ………………………………………………………………………………………


 (a) Setbacks (m)


  Building                   Front                           Rear                Side 01             Side 02
  Number            Averag         Minimu          Averag        Minimu    Averag    Minimu    Avera     Minimu
                        e              m               e               m     e             m    ge         m
 Building
 01
 Building
 02
 Building
 03


            (b) Plot Area Sq metre

       (c) FSI

       (d) Coverage




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                    87


                                               Building 01                                       Building 01
                                                Occupancy                                        Occupancy
                                        Height of the building                              Height of the building
        Floors
                                                  Built up                                        Built up
                                                                        Floor area                             Floor area
                                 Use               area sq.                           Use          area sq.
                                                                        Sq. metres                             Sq. metres
                                                   metres                                          metres
Basement
Ground
First
Second
………………
…
Total


         (e)Date of commencement of Construction
         (f) Whether the proposed construction falls in any town planning Scheme/ plan
         1. The measurements, specifications and other details mentioned above are correct, complete
         and true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I shall abide by the approved plan and
         the provisions in the Act and Rules in undertaking the construction.
         2. The plot and the proposed building conform to the provisions of Coastal Zone Regulation
         notification and Kerala Conservation of Paddy and Wetland Act 2008 and its subsequent
         amendments.
         3. The building plan is prepared in accordance with the provisions in the Kerala
         Municipality Act 1994,                  the Kerala Municipality Building Rules 2019, the provisions
         contained          in       the       sanctioned           Town        Planning    Schemes,      if   any,   and
         permission/NOC/concurrence, if any, required as per Rule 5(4) of the Kerala Municipality
         Building Rules 2019.




  This is a digitally signed Gazette.
  Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  88


  Authorised Person                                                         Architect/ Engineer in charge
  Name:                                                                     Name:
  Designation:                                                              Designation:




  Signature:                                                                Signature:




  Date:                                                                     Date:


       Encl: 1. Building plans, documents and other details as per Rule 6.
       2. NOCs/Clearances (specify if any):
       3. Others (specify):
       Note: The Self certified building permit is valid only along with the duly signed
       acknowledgment certificate in Appendix A1C

       (xiii)          in Appendix P,-
                  (a) The word “empanelled” shall be omitted;
                  (b) for the Verification Report and the entries under it the following, shall be
                       substituted, namely:-
                                                                      “Verification Report
                      (This form has to be completed and submitted to the Secretary by the officer
                      inspecting the site after his site inspection and verification regarding the
                      compliance of the structure up to plinth level in accordance to the building rules
                      and other relevant Act/Rules upon which the permit has been issued, and is fit for
                      continuing construction or whether the permit needs to be revised or revoked.)”
                      (xiv) Appendix Q shall be omitted.


(57)            For Schedule I, Schedule II and Schedule III the following Schedules shall be
     substituted, namely:-




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  89


                                                               SCHEDULE-I
                                            APPLICATION FEE
                            [See rules 5 (1), 15 (6), 70 (4), 74 (3), 75 (4) & 94]
                                                                        Well
                                                                        (Rs.
                                        Buildings                        per
                         Plo
                                      (Rupees per                      applic
                           t                                                             Conve
                                      Application)                     ation)
                         Su                                                               rsion
                                         Above                                                  Con
                         bdi                                                                of
                                            100                                 Comp            versi
                         vis Less                                                        erecti
                                             sq.               Hut              ound            on of
                         ion than                                                        on of
                                         metre-                (Rs.              Wall           roof
Sl         LSG            (R       or              Above                                 shutte
                                            less                per              (Rs.           (Rs.
No         Type            s.   equal                300                                   r or
                                            than              applic              per            per
                         per to 100                   sq.                                 door
                                              or              ation)            applic          appli
                          ap      sq.              meter                                   (Rs.
                                           equal                                ation)          catio
                         pli metre                 Built-                                   per
                                          to 300                                                 n)
                         cat       of                 up                                 applic
                                             sq.
                         ion Built-                 Area                                 ation)
                                          metre
                           )      up
                                          Built-
                                Area
                                             up
                                           Area
(1)        (2)           (3)      (4)        (5)     (6)        (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)   (11)
        Municip
        al
1                        50        150          500          4000      10   15   15       20     20
        Corporat
        ion
        Municip
2       al               30        150          500          3000      10   10   10       15     15
        Council

               Note:-
               (1) No separate application or fee for land development is required along with
               application for building permit except in cases specified otherwise in these rules.
               (2) Separate application and fee is required only for the conversion or erection of
               shutters or doors or roof in an existing building under rules 72 and 74 (3).
               (3) The overall built-up area of all the buildings in a plot, (including existing,
               proposed, and area for regularisation) shall be considered for deciding the slab for the
               application fee.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                   90


                                                           SCHEDULE II

                                        PERMIT FEE - PUCCA BUILDINGS
                                    [See rules 9(4), 56(3), 70(7), 74(3) & 75(4)]
                                               Rate (Rupees / sq. meter of Built-up Area)
                                   Municipal Corporation                    Municipal Council
                                              Ab
                                              ov
                                                e        Abo            A
                                              80           ve           b    Le
                                                                                          Abo
                                              sq.        150            o     ss
                                Les                                                      ve 80
                                              me          sq.           v    tha
                                  s                                                        sq.
                                              tre        metr           e      n                    Above
                                than                                                     metr
Sl       Occupancy                            s-          es -          3     or                    150 sq.
                                  or                                                       es -
No         Group                              les        less           0    eq                    metres -       Above
                                equ                                                       less
                                                s        than           0    ual                   less than      300 sq.
                                al to                                                     than
                                              tha          or           s     to                  or equal to     metres
                                 80                                                         or
                                                n        equa           q.   80                     300 sq.
                                 sq.                                                     equal
                                               or         l to          m    sq.                    metres
                                met                                                         to
                                              eq         300            et   me
                                 res                                                      150
                                              ual         sq.           r    tre
                                                                                           m2
                                               to        metr           e      s
                                              15           es           s
                                                0
                                              m2
(1)      (2)                     (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)   (7)          (8)        (9)           (10)
 1 A1                             5           20           70          150   3.5         17.5        60            150
 2 G1, G2, G3                    15           50           70          120   10           40         60            100
 3 F, J                          15           60          100          150   10           50         80            150
    A2, B, C, D,
 4                                                                           10           40          70           100
    E, H, I                      15           50           80          120
 5 D1                            7.5          25           40           60   5            20          35            50

                            PERMIT FEE - OTHER THAN PUCCA BUILDINGS
                                                                                                  Rate
Sl
                                Description
No                                                                            Municipal            Municipal Council
                                                                             Corporation
(1)                           (2)                                                (3)                        (4)
       Plot subdivision as per rule 31(1),(2) & (3)
1      (Rs. Per Ares of the land proposed for                                      1000                    750
       subdivision)
       Sheds (Rupees per unit including their
2                                                                                   75                      50
       accessory units if any)




 This is a digitally signed Gazette.
 Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                  91


      Residential units for Economically Weaker
      Sections funded by Government or Local Self
3                                                                      NIL              NIL
      Government Institutions (Rupees per dwelling
      unit)
4     Wells (Rupees per unit)                                          25                 20
5     Compound wall (Rupees per metre length)                           4                  3
      Shutter or door conversion or erection under
6                                                                      500              300
      rules 72 and 74(3) (Rupees per unit)
      Roof conversion undue rules 72 and 74(3)
7                                                                       4                 3
      (Rupees per sq. metre of built-up area)

               Note:
               "(1) Area of accessory building(s) such as car shed, toilet, cabin for watch and ward
               etc. shall be added to main building for calculating total permit fee. In the case of
               addition or alteration, only the area of the portion added or altered shall be taken in to
               account.
               (2) In the case of tourist resorts, the permit fee stipulated for pucca buildings shall be
               applicable irrespective of the structural conditions.
               (3) In case there is more than one building in the same plot, each of them should be
               treated as separate and the fee slab shall be determined by considering the area and
               occupancy of each building separately.
               (4) In the case of extension/ addition to an existing building, the total built-up area of
               the building (including existing, proposed, and area for regularisation) shall be
               considered for deciding the slab for the permit fee and the fee shall be calculated for
               the extended/ added area.
               (5) In the case of multiple occupancies within a building, the fee slab shall be
               determined by considering the total area of the building, and the permit fee shall be the
               sum of the permit fees applicable for areas under different occupancies.




This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                    92


                                                            SCHEDULE III


                                            SCRUTINY FEE - LAYOUT APPROVAL
                                                                           Rate (Rupees/ Sq. metres of built up
                Sl. No.                    Occupancy Group
                                                                                          area)
                   (1)                                (2)                                  (3)
                     1           A1                                                         4
                     2           G1, G2, G3                                                 4
                     3           F, J                                                       5
                     4           A2, B, C, D, E, H, I                                       4




                 Note:
                 (1) The amount has to be remitted in Government treasury and the copy of the challan
                      has to be enclosed along with application for layout.
                 (2) The scrutiny fee shall be remitted afresh for the entire built up area, when there is a
                      change in the total built-up area or occupancy or area of the plot, at the time of
                      resubmission(s).”



                                                                                          By order of the Governor,

                                                                                                   Anupama T.V.,
                                                                                  Special Secretary to Government.


                                                          Explanatory Note

     (This does not form part of the notification, but is intended to indicate its general purport.)




        Government had constituted a committee vide G.O.(Rt.) No. 2162/2024/LSGD dated
12.11.2024 and G.O.(Rt.) No. 2584/2024/LSGD dated 31.12.2024 for furnishing recommendations
to the Government on the changes to be made in the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019.




  This is a digitally signed Gazette.
  Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
                                                                       93


 Also as part of the Part X-B (Urban Reforms-Compliance Reduction & Deregulation for Ease of
 Doing Business (EODB) of the Scheme for Special Assistance to States for Capital lnvestment
 (SSASCI) 2025-26' which aims at a spur in economic growth in the country through reforms in
 building regulations for industrial and commercial buildings, it is essential to provide necessary
 provisions to allow more land for the development of industries and commercial buildings. Based
 on the recommendations submitted by the committee, the changes needed as per SSASCI 2025-26
 and in supersession of the Kerala Municipality Building (Amendment) Rules, 2025 issued under
 G.O. (P) No.16/2025/LSGD dated 19th March, 2025 and published as S. R. O. No. 297/2025 in
 Kerala Gazette Extraordinary No.1070 dated 19 th March 2025, Government have decided to amend
 further the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019 suitably in accordance with the provisions of
 the Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 (Act 20 of 1994).




           This notification is intended to achieve the above object.




____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                              PUBLISHED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRESSES
                            AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, 2025
     This is a digitally signed Gazette.
     Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
